                                         First return, then explore

                                         Adrien Ecoffet∗1 , Joost Huizinga∗1 , Joel Lehman1 , Kenneth O. Stanley1 & Jeff Clune1,2

                                         1
                                             Uber AI, San Francisco, CA, USA
                                         2
                                             OpenAI, San Francisco, CA, USA (work done at Uber AI)
                                         ∗
                                             These authors contributed equally to this work
arXiv:2004.12919v6 [cs.AI] 16 Sep 2021




                                         Authors’ note: This is the pre-print version of this work. You most likely want the updated, published version, which
                                         can be found as an unformatted PDF at https://adrien.ecoffet.com/files/go-explore-nature.pdf
                                         or as a formatted web-only document at https://tinyurl.com/Go-Explore-Nature.

                                         Please cite as:
                                         Ecoffet, A., Huizinga, J., Lehman, J., Stanley, K.O. and Clune, J. First return, then explore. Nature 590, 580–586
                                         (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-03157-9




                                         The promise of reinforcement learning is to solve complex sequential decision problems autonomously by spec-
                                         ifying a high-level reward function only. However, reinforcement learning algorithms struggle when, as is often
                                         the case, simple and intuitive rewards provide sparse1 and deceptive2 feedback. Avoiding these pitfalls re-
                                         quires thoroughly exploring the environment, but despite substantial investments by the community, creating
                                         algorithms that can do so remains one of the central challenges of the field. We hypothesise that the main im-
                                         pediment to effective exploration originates from algorithms forgetting how to reach previously visited states
                                         (“detachment”) and from failing to first return to a state before exploring from it (“derailment”). We introduce
                                         Go-Explore, a family of algorithms that addresses these two challenges directly through the simple principles
                                         of explicitly remembering promising states and first returning to such states before intentionally exploring. Go-
                                         Explore solves all heretofore unsolved Atari games (meaning those for which algorithms could not previously
                                         outperform humans when evaluated following current community standards for Atari3 ) and surpasses the state
                                         of the art on all hard-exploration games1 , with orders of magnitude improvements on the grand challenges Mon-
                                         tezuma’s Revenge and Pitfall. We also demonstrate the practical potential of Go-Explore on a challenging and
                                         extremely sparse-reward pick-and-place robotics task. Additionally, we show that adding a goal-conditioned
                                         policy can further improve Go-Explore’s exploration efficiency and enable it to handle stochasticity throughout
                                         training. The striking contrast between the substantial performance gains from Go-Explore and the simplicity
                                         of its mechanisms suggests that remembering promising states, returning to them, and exploring from them



                                                                                                  1
is a powerful and general approach to exploration, an insight that may prove critical to the creation of truly
intelligent learning agents.


    Recent years have yielded impressive achievements in Reinforcement Learning (RL), including world-champion
level performance in Go4 , Starcraft II5 , and Dota II6 , as well as autonomous learning of robotic skills such as running,
jumping, and grasping7,8 . Many of these successes were enabled by reward functions that are carefully designed to be
highly informative. However, for many practical problems, defining a good reward function is non-trivial; to guide a
household robot to a coffee machine, one might provide a reward only when the machine is successfully reached, but
doing so makes the reward sparse, as it may require many correct actions for the coffee machine to be reached in the
first place. One might instead attempt to define a denser reward, such as the Euclidean distance towards the machine,
but such a reward function can be deceptive; naively following the reward function may lead the robot into a dead end
that does not lead to the machine. Furthermore, attempts to define a dense reward function are a common cause of
reward hacking, in which the agent finds a way to maximise the reward function by producing wholly unintended (and
potentially unsafe) behaviour9,10 , such as knocking over furniture or driving through a wall to reach the machine.

    These challenges motivate designing RL algorithms that better handle sparsity and deception. A key observation
is that sufficient exploration of the state space enables discovering sparse rewards as well as avoiding deceptive local
optima11,12 . We argue that two major issues have hindered the ability of previous algorithms to explore: detachment,
in which the algorithm loses track of interesting areas to explore from, and derailment, in which the exploratory mech-
anisms of the algorithm prevent it from returning to previously visited states, preventing exploration directly and/or
forcing practitioners to make exploratory mechanisms so minimal that effective exploration does not occur (Supple-
mentary Information). We present Go-Explore, a family of algorithms designed to explicitly avoid detachment and
derailment. We demonstrate how the Go-Explore paradigm allows the creation of algorithms that thoroughly explore
environments. Go-Explore solves all previously unsolved Atari games* , where solved is defined as surpassing hu-
man performance, which has been posited as a major milestone in previous work13–15 . It also surpasses the state of
the art on all hard-exploration Atari games (except in one case where the maximum score is reached by Go-Explore
and previous algorithms). Additionally, we demonstrate that it can solve a practical simulated robotics problem with
an extremely sparse reward. Finally, we show that its performance can be greatly increased by incorporating mini-
mal domain knowledge and examine how harnessing a policy during exploration can improve exploration efficiency,
highlighting the versatility of the Go-Explore family.
     * Concurrent work13 has similarly reached this milestone on all Atari games, but was evaluated under easier, mostly deterministic conditions
that do not meet community-defined standards3 for evaluation on Atari (Methods “State of the art on Atari”). Also, even if these differences in
evaluation are ignored, Go-Explore accomplished the same feat at effectively the same time, but via a totally different method, which is useful for
the scientific community. Go-Explore additionally obtains higher scores on most of the games that we tested (Supplementary Information).




                                                                        2
The Go-Explore family of algorithms

To avoid detachment, Go-Explore builds an archive of the different states it has visited in the environment, thus
ensuring that states cannot be forgotten. Starting from an archive containing the initial state, it builds this archive
iteratively: first, it probabilistically selects a state to return to from the archive (Fig. 1a), goes back (i.e. returns) to that
state (the “go” step; Fig. 1b), then explores from that state (the “explore” step; Fig. 1c) and updates the archive with all
novel states encountered (Fig. 1e). Previous RL algorithms do not separate returning from exploring, and instead mix
in exploration throughout an episode, usually by adding random actions a fraction of the time14,16 or by sampling from
a stochastic policy17,18 . By first returning before exploring, Go-Explore avoids derailment by minimizing exploration
in the return policy (thus minimizing failure to return) after which it can switch to a purely exploratory policy.

   In practice, non-trivial environments have too many states to store explicitly. To resolve this issue, similar states
are grouped into cells, and states are only considered novel if they are in a cell that does not yet exist in the archive
(Fig. 1d). To maximise performance, if a state maps to an already known cell, but is associated with a better trajectory
(e.g. higher performing or shorter, see Methods), that state and its associated trajectory will replace the state and
trajectory currently associated with that cell. This behaviour is reminiscent of the MAP-Elites algorithm19 , and quality
diversity algorithms more broadly20,21 , although it is novel because it applies such ideas to reach new locations within
a state space, instead of to discover new styles of behaviour as MAP-Elites typically does. Additionally, Go-Explore
differs from MAP-Elites in that exploration is done by extending trajectories, rather than by modifying a policy and
rerunning it.

   While a policy can return the agent to a state (as we demonstrate at the end of this work), Go-Explore provides
a unique opportunity to leverage the availability of simulators in RL tasks; due to the large number of training trials
current RL algorithms require, as well as the safety concerns that arise when running RL directly in the real world,
simulators have played a key role in training the most compelling applications of RL8,22–24 , and will likely continue
to be harnessed for the foreseeable future. The inner state of any simulator can be saved and restored at a later time,
making it possible to instantly return to a previously seen state. However, returning without a policy also means
that this exploration process, which we call the exploration phase, does not produce a policy robust to the inherent
stochasticity of the real world. Instead, when returning without a policy, Go-Explore stores and maintains the highest-
scoring trajectory (i.e. sequence of actions) to each cell. After the exploration phase is complete, these trajectories
make it possible to train a robust and high-performing policy by Learning from Demonstrations (LfD)25 , where the
Go-Explore trajectories replace the usual human expert demonstrations. Because it produces robust policies from
brittle trajectories, we call this process the robustification phase (Fig. 1 “Robustification Phase”).




                                                                3
                                                     Exploration Phase
                   a                                          State Cell Score Visits ... Prob:

                         probabilistically                                       0          108     ...    3%
                           select state                                         500          7      ...    27%
                          from archive
                                                                             ...                            ...

                                                                                            Environment
                   b                                        restore simulator
                                                                  state
                                go to                              OR
                                state                      run goal-conditioned
                                                                  policy


                   c                                      Environment                       Environment

                              explore
                             from state



                   d
                                                                                      ...

                         map encountered
                          states to cells
                                                                                      ...

                   e
                                                              State Cell Score Visits ...
                                                                                 0          108     ...
                               update                                                                       updated
                                                                                500          8      ...
                               archive                                                                      information
                                                                             ...
                                                                                500          1      ...     new state


                                                  Robustification Phase
                                                 (not necessary in all variants)

                           demonstrations                                                           trained network
                  (trajectories from Exploration Phase)                                           (robust to stochasticity)

                                                              algorithm for learning

                                                      +       from demonstrations
                                                               in environment with
                                                                   stochasticity



Figure 1: Overview of Go-Explore. (a) Probabilistically select a state from the archive, guided by heuristics that
prefer states associated with promising cells. (b) Return to the selected state, such as by restoring simulator state or by
running a goal-conditioned policy. (c) Explore from that state by taking random actions or sampling from a policy. (d)
Map every state encountered during returning and exploring to a low-dimensional cell representation. (e) Add states
that map to new cells to the archive and update other archive entries.




                                                                     4
Learning to play Atari when returning without a policy

The Atari benchmark suite26 , a prominent benchmark for RL algorithms14,27,28 , contains a diverse set of games with
varying levels of reward sparsity and deceptiveness, making it an excellent platform for demonstrating the effective-
ness of Go-Explore. The following experiment highlights the benefit of a “go” step that restores the simulator state
directly. In this experiment, the “explore” step happens through random actions. The state-to-cell mapping consists of
a parameter-based downscaling of the current game frame, which results in similar-looking frames being aggregated
into the same cell (Fig. 1d). This mapping does not require any game-specific domain knowledge. Good state-to-cell-
mapping parameters result in a representation that strikes a balance between two extremes: lack of aggregation (e.g.
one cell for every frame, which is computationally inefficient) and excessive aggregation (e.g. assigning all frames
to a single cell, which prevents exploration). To identify good downscaling parameters we define a downscaling
objective function that estimates the quality of the balance achieved. Because appropriate downscaling parameters
can vary across Atari games and even as exploration progresses within a given game, such parameters are optimised
dynamically at regular intervals by maximising this objective function over a sample of recently discovered frames
(Methods).

    Here, the robustification phase consists of a modified version of the “backward algorithm”29 , currently the highest
performing LfD algorithm on Montezuma’s Revenge. Due to the large computational expense of the robustification
process, the focus of this work is on eleven games that have been considered hard-exploration by the community1 or
for which the state-of-the-art performance was still below human performance (Methods “State of the art on Atari”).
To ensure that the trained policy becomes robust to environmental perturbations, during robustification stochasticity
is added to these environments following current community standards for what constitutes the appropriately difficult
version of this benchmark3 . The rewards in these games differ by orders of magnitude and standard reward clipping
overemphasises small rewards over bigger payoffs. However, the exploration phase provides extensive information
about the rewards available in each game, making it possible to automatically scale rewards to an appropriate range
(Methods).

    At test time, the final mean performance of Go-Explore is both superhuman and surpasses the state of the art in all
eleven games (except in Freeway where both Go-Explore and the state of the art reach the maximum score; Fig. 2b).
These games include the grand challenges of Montezuma’s Revenge, where Go-Explore quadruples the state-of-the-art
score, and Pitfall, where Go-Explore surpasses average human performance while previous algorithms were unable to
score any points† . Also noteworthy is the performance on Private Eye, where Go-Explore is able to reliably achieve
the highest possible score in 4 out of 5 runs, and the performance on Skiing, where Go-Explore outperforms human
performance despite the fact that the reward structure of this game makes it notoriously hard to train on13,31 .
    † Recallthat only results evaluated according to community-defined standards as to the appropriately challenging stochastic version of Atari
are considered here, namely those with sticky actions3 . Some algorithms have scored points on Pitfall without sticky actions, including recent
concurrent work13,30 .



                                                                       5
                                     (a) Historical progress on Montezuma’s Revenge.

                                            Exploration   Robustification
                            Game              Phase          Phase            SOTA     Avg. Human
                           Berzerk             131,216          197,376       1,383          2,630
                           Bowling                 247               260         69            160
                          Centipede            613,815        1,422,628      10,166         12,017
                           Freeway                   34                34        34             30
                           Gravitar             13,385             7,588      3,906          3,351
                      MontezumaRevenge          24,758            43,791     11,618          4,753
                            Pitfall              6,945             6,954          0          6,463
                         PrivateEye             60,529            95,756     26,364         69,571
                            Skiing              -4,242            -3,660    -10,386         -4,336
                            Solaris             20,306            19,671      3,282         12,326
                           Venture               3,074             2,281      1,916          1,187
(b) Performance on the 10 focus games of the Go-Explore variant that uses the downscaled representation during the explo-
ration phase. Bold indicates the best scores with stochastic evaluation. A video of high performing runs can be found at
https://youtu.be/e aqRq59-Ns.

Figure 2: Performance of robustified Go-Explore on Atari games. (a) Go-Explore produces massive improvements
over previous methods on Montezuma’s Revenge, a grand challenge which was the focus of intense research for many
years. (b) It exceeds the average human score in each of the 11 hard-exploration and unsolved games in the Atari suite,
and matches or beats (often by a factor of 2 or more) the state of the art in each of these games.




                                                           6
% of human performance   100000%



                         10000%



                          1000%



                           100%




                                      YarsRevenge
                                              Tennis
                                       Tutankham
                                    KungFuMaster
                                           Freeway




                                           Venture




                                     WizardOfWor




                                          Frostbite
                                      RoadRunner
                                     FishingDerby




                                          Breakout




                                         TimePilot
                                      VideoPinball
                                         Kangaroo


                                         Robotank
                               MontezumaRevenge




                                        MsPacman
                                                Pong




                                        IceHockey
                                            Zaxxon




                                             Boxing
                                            Enduro
                                               Pitfall
                                                Hero



                                         Asteroids
                                        PrivateEye




                                          Riverraid




                                            Atlantis




                                     DemonAttack
                                              Skiing




                                           Bowling
                                             Solaris




                                           Phoenix


                                           Gravitar
                                        BankHeist

                                     CrazyClimber

                                            Amidar
                                         Seaquest

                                       BeamRider
                                       BattleZone
                                  NameThisGame
                                         UpNDown

                                            Berzerk
                                                Krull
                                            Gopher
                                    SpaceInvaders
                                       StarGunner

                                            Assault

                                      DoubleDunk
                                        Centipede

                                              Qbert

                                             Asterix
                                               Alien
                                ChopperCommand
                                       Jamesbond
    Figure 3: Human-normalised performance of the exploration phase on all Atari games. The exploration phase of
    Go-Explore exceeds human performance in every game, often by orders of magnitude.


                          Interestingly, there are many cases where the robustified policies obtain higher scores than the trajectories discov-
    ered during the exploration phase. There are two reasons for this: first, while the exploration phase does optimise for
    score by updating trajectories to higher scoring ones, the robustification phase is more effective at fine-grained reward
    optimisation; second, we provide the backward algorithm with demonstrations from multiple (10) runs of the explo-
    ration phase, thus allowing it to follow the best trajectory in the sample while still benefiting from the data contained
    in worse trajectories.

                          The ability of the Go-Explore exploration phase to find high-performing trajectories is not limited to hard-exploration
    environments; it finds trajectories with superhuman scores for all of the 55 Atari games provided by OpenAI gym32 ,
    a feat that has not been performed before (save concurrent work published just prior to this work13 ) and in 83.6% of
    these games the trajectories reach scores higher than those achieved by state-of-the-art algorithms (Fig. 3), suggesting
    its potential for automatically generating solution demonstrations in many other challenging domains. Modern RL
    algorithms are already able to adequately solve the games not included in the 11 focus games in this work, as demon-
    strated by previous work (Extended Data Table 3). Thus, because robustifying these already solved games would have
    been prohibitively expensive, we did not perform robustification experiments for these 44 games.

                          Go-Explore can also harness easy-to-provide domain knowledge to substantially boost performance. It can do so
    because the way Go-Explore explores a state space depends on the cell representation, meaning exploration efficiency
    can be improved by constructing a cell representation that only contains features relevant for exploration. We demon-
    strate this principle in the games of Montezuma’s Revenge and Pitfall, where the features are the agent’s room number
    and coordinates for both games, as well as the level number and keys for Montezuma’s Revenge.

                          The exploration phase with added domain knowledge explores both games extensively, discovering all 255 rooms


                                                                                  7
of Pitfall and completely solving Montezuma’s Revenge by reaching the end of level 3. After robustification, the
resulting policies achieve a mean score of 102,571 on Pitfall, close to the maximum achievable score of 112,000. On
Montezuma’s Revenge, the mean score of the robustified policies is 1,731,645, exceeding the previous state of the
art score by a factor of 150. This post-robustification score on Montezuma’s Revenge is not only much greater than
average human performance, but in fact is greater than the human world record of 1.2 million33 (Fig. 2a). Notably,
the performance on Montezuma’s Revenge is limited not by the quality of the learned agents, but by the default time
limit of 400,000 frames that is imposed by OpenAI Gym, but is not inherent to the game. With this limit removed,
robustified agents appear to be able to achieve arbitrarily high scores, with one agent frequently reaching a score of
over 40 million after 12.5 million frames (the equivalent of about 58 hours of continuous game play).

   Besides effectively representing all information relevant for exploration, the spatial cell representation enables
improving cell selection during exploration, such as by considering whether neighbouring cells have been visited.
Doing so greatly improves performance in Montezuma’s Revenge, though it has little effect on Pitfall.


A hard-exploration robotics environment

While robotics is a promising application for reinforcement learning and it is often easy to define the goal of a robotics
task at a high level (e.g. to put a cup in the cupboard), it is much more difficult to define an appropriate and sufficiently
dense reward function (which would need to consider all of the low-level motor commands involved in opening the
cupboard, moving toward the cup, grasping the cup, etc.). Go-Explore allows us to forgo such a dense reward function
in favor of a sparse reward function that only considers the high-level task. In addition, robot policies are usually
trained in simulation before being transferred to the real world8,22–24 , making robotics a natural domain to demonstrate
the usefulness of harnessing the ability of simulators to restore states in reinforcement learning.

   Accordingly, the following experiment, performed in a simulated environment, demonstrates that Go-Explore can
solve a practical hard-exploration task in which a robot arm needs to pick up an object and put it inside of one of
four shelves (Fig. 4a). Two of the shelves are behind latched doors, providing an additional challenge. A reward
is given only when the object is put into a specified target shelf. Grasping an object and picking it up is itself a
challenging problem in robotics, in part due to the challenge of exploration34,35 . Roboticists are often forced to
employ the imperfect workaround of simplifying exploration by restricting the robot’s range of motion substantially
to favour arm positions that make grasping more likely36 . In our setup, by contrast, all nine joints of the robot arm are
independently controlled to the full extent permitted by the robot’s specifications. A state-of-the-art RL algorithm for
continuous control (PPO18 ) does not encounter a single reward after training in this environment for a billion frames,
showcasing the hard-exploration nature of this problem. For this problem, Go-Explore returns by restoring simulator
state, explores by taking random actions, and assigns states to cells with an easy-to-provide domain-knowledge-based
mapping (Methods).



                                                             8
                                                                      (a) Solving the top right shelf of the robotics environment.
                                   Go-Explore Expl. Phase        PPO + IM Control          Approx. Solved                                              Go-Explore Robustification Phase       PPO + IM Control
                                          Top Left                                      Top Right                                  100%
                                                                                                                                                       Top Left                    100%
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Top Right
                       250                                           1.2K
                       200                                             1K                                                          80%                                             80%
     Number of Cells




                                                                                                                    Success Rate




                       150                                            800                                                          60%                                             60%
                                                                      600
                       100                                                                                                         40%                                             40%
                                                                      400
                        50                                            200                                                          20%                                             20%
                         0                                              0                                                           0%                                              0%
                             0.0   0.5       1.0       1.5     2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5       2.0                     0.0       0.5        1.0       1.5                  0    2          4          6
                                                             1e9                                            1e9                                                            1e9                                           1e8
                                         Bottom Left                                Bottom Right                                   100%
                                                                                                                                                      Bottom Left                  100%
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bottom Right
                       250
                       200                                            1K                                                           80%                                             80%
     Number of Cells




                                                                     800
                                                                                                                    Success Rate




                       150                                                                                                         60%                                             60%
                                                                     600
                       100                                                                                                         40%                                             40%
                                                                     400
                        50                                           200                                                           20%                                             20%
                         0                                             0                                                            0%                                              0%
                             0.0   0.5       1.0       1.5     2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5       2.0                     0.0     0.2      0.4 0.6       0.8     1.0      0.0     0.5        1.0       1.5     2.0
                                           Frames            1e9                         Frames             1e9                                          Frames            1e9                         Frames            1e9

      (b) Cells discovered by the exploration phase and an intrin-                                                                          (c) Robustification progress per target shelf.
      sic motivation control.

Figure 4: Go-Explore can Solve a Challenging, Sparse-Reward, Simulated Robotics Task. (a) A simulated Fetch
robot needs to grasp an object and put it in one of four shelves. (b) The exploration phase significantly outperforms an
intrinsic motivation control using the same cell representation. (c) For each of four different target locations, including
the two with a door, the robot is able to learn to pick the object up and place it on the shelf in 99% of trials.




                                                                                                                9
   In the exploration phase, Go-Explore quickly and reliably discovers successful trajectories for putting the object
in each of the four shelves (Fig. 4b). In contrast, a count-based intrinsic motivation algorithm with the same domain
knowledge representation as the exploration phase is incapable of discovering any reward (Fig. 4c), and indeed dis-
covers only a fraction of the cells discovered by the exploration phase after 1 billion frames of training, 50 times more
than the exploration phase of Go-Explore (Fig. 4b). In spite of receiving intrinsic rewards for touching the object, this
control was incapable of learning to reliably grasp, thus making a large fraction of cells unreachable (including those
necessary to obtain rewards). Evidence suggests that this failure to grasp is due to the problem of derailment, which
Go-Explore is specifically designed to solve (Supplementary Information).

   While only a single trajectory was extracted for robustification from each exploration-phase run of Go-Explore in
the Atari experiments, the trajectories discovered in the robotics task are exceptionally diverse (e.g. some throw the
object into the shelf while others gently deposit it), making it possible to provide additional information to the robus-
tification phase by extracting multiple trajectories from each exploration-phase run. Robustifying these trajectories
produces robust and reliable policies in 99% of cases (Fig. 4c).


Policy-based Go-Explore

Leveraging the ability of simulators to restore states provides many benefits that increase the efficiency of Go-Explore,
but it is not a requirement. When returning, instead of restoring simulator state, it is possible to execute a policy
conditioned on (i.e. told to go to) the state or cell to return to, which we call policy-based Go-Explore. While returning
to a state in this manner is less efficient than restoring simulator state (the actions required to return to a state need
to be executed in the environment), there are nevertheless advantages to doing so. First, having access to a policy in
the exploration phase makes it possible to sample from this policy during the explore step, which has the potential
to substantially increase its efficiency vs. taking random actions thanks to the generalisation properties of the policy
(e.g. the algorithm need only learn how to cross a specific obstacle once instead of solving that problem again via
random actions each time). Second, training a policy in the exploration phase obviates the need for robustification
and thus removes its associated additional complexity, hyperparameters, and overhead (see ‘Implementation Details’
in Methods). Finally, in a stochastic environment, it may not always be possible to reliably repeat certain lucky
sequences of transitions that enabled visiting a state, even when taking optimal actions. While this issue did not
prove to be a major roadblock in our experiments, in other domains it could prevent certain trajectories from being
robustified. Exploring directly in the stochastic environment with the help of a policy makes it possible to detect these
cases early and take appropriate measures to avoid them (Supplementary Information).

   In policy-based Go-Explore, a goal-conditioned policy is trained during the exploration phase with a common
reinforcement learning algorithm (PPO18 ). Because goal-conditioned policies often struggle to reach far away states37 ,
instead of training the policy to directly reach cells in the archive, the policy is trained to follow the best trajectory of



                                                             10
                                120K                                                                      25K




                                                                               Mean Reward to Best Cell
     Mean Reward to Best Cell   100K                                                                      20K
                                80K                                                                       15K
                                60K
                                                                                                          10K
                                40K                                                                                     average human
                                                                                                          5K
                                20K              state of the art
                                                 average human                                                          state of the art
                                   00.0                                                                     0
                                          0.2   0.4 0.6 0.8         1.0      1.2                            0.0   0.2     0.4      0.6     0.8      1.0
                                                     Frames               1e10                                              Frames               1e10
                                          (a) Montezuma’s Revenge                                                       (b) Pitfall

Figure 5: Policy-based Go-Explore with domain knowledge outperforms state-of-the-art and human perfor-
mance in Montezuma’s Revenge and Pitfall. On both Montezuma’s Revenge (a) and Pitfall (b), performance in-
creases throughout the run, suggesting even higher performance is possible with additional training time.


cells that previously led to the selected state (Methods). In addition, because trajectories that successfully overcome
difficult obstacles are initially rare (the network has to rely on sequences of random actions to initially pass those
obstacles) policy-based Go-Explore also performs self-imitation learning to extract as much information from these
successful trajectories as possible38 . After our publication of an early pre-print presenting Go-Explore without a return
policy, and while our work on policy-based Go-Explore was well underway, another team independently introduced a
Go-Explore variant that is similarly policy-based39 ; policy-based Go-Explore substantially outperforms this variant in
terms of performance and sample efficiency (see Supplementary Information for a full comparison).

   The goal-conditioned policy has the potential to greatly improve exploration effectiveness over random actions; in
addition to returning to previously visited cells, the policy can also be queried during the explore step by presenting
it with additional goals, including goals not already in the archive. Such goal cells are chosen according to a simple
strategy that either chooses a cell adjacent to the current position of the agent, possibly leading to a new cell, or
randomly selects a cell from the archive, potentially repositioning the agent within the archive or finding new cells
while trying to do so (Methods). To examine whether this exploration strategy is indeed more effective than taking
random actions, every time post-return exploration is started, the algorithm randomly commits with equal probability
to either taking random actions or sampling from the policy for the duration of the post-return exploration step, thus
ensuring that each strategy will be employed in similar scenarios equally often.

   Policy-based Go-Explore was tested on Montezuma’s Revenge and Pitfall with the domain-knowledge cell repre-
sentation. On these games, it beats the state of the art and human performance with a mean reward of 97,728 points
on Montezuma’s Revenge and 20,093 points on Pitfall (Fig. 5), demonstrating that the performance of Go-Explore
is not merely a result of its ability to leverage simulator restorability, but a function of its overall design. Further-



                                                                               11
more, we found that sampling from the policy is more effective at discovering new cells than taking random actions,
and becomes increasingly more effective across training as the policy gains new, generally useful skills, ultimately
resulting in the discovery of over four times more cells than random actions on both Montezuma’s Revenge and Pitfall
(Extended Data Fig. 7). Given that random actions form the basis of exploration for many RL algorithms, this result
highlights the potential for improvement by moving towards goal-conditioned policy-based exploration.


Conclusion

The effectiveness of Go-Explore on the problems presented in this work suggest that it will enable progress in many
domains that can be framed as sequential decision making problems, including robotics8,22–24 , neural architecture
search40 , language understanding41 , scheduling42 , marketing43 , and drug design44 . In addition, as a result of the
modular nature of the Go-Explore family, the instantiations described in this work are only a fraction of the possible
ways in which the Go-Explore paradigm can be implemented. Other instantiations may learn the cell representation,
learn to choose which cells to return to, learn which cells to try to reach during the exploration step, learn a separate,
specialised policy whose job is only to explore after returning, learn to explore safely in the real world by mining
diverse catastrophes in simulation, maintain a continuous density-based archive rather than a discrete cell-based one,
leverage all transitions gathered during exploration for robustification, and so on. These unexplored variants could
further improve the generality, performance, robustness, and efficiency of Go-Explore. Finally, the insights presented
in this work extend beyond Go-Explore; the simple decomposition of remembering previously found states, returning
to them and then exploring from them appears to be especially powerful, suggesting it may be fundamental feature of
learning in general. Harnessing these insights, either within or outside of the context of Go-Explore, may be a key to
improving our ability to create generally intelligent agents.


References

 1.   Bellemare, M. et al. Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation in NIPS (2016), 1471–1479.

 2.   Lehman, J. & Stanley, K. O. Novelty Search and the Problem with Objectives in Genetic Programming Theory
      and Practice IX (GPTP 2011) (2011).

 3.   Machado, M. C. et al. Revisiting the Arcade Learning Environment: Evaluation Protocols and Open Problems
      for General Agents. J. Artif. Intell. Res. 61, 523–562 (2018).

 4.   Silver, D. et al. Mastering the game of Go without human knowledge. Nature 550, 354–359 (2017).

 5.   Vinyals, O. et al. Grandmaster level in StarCraft II using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature 575, 350–
      354 (2019).

 6.   OpenAI et al. Dota 2 with Large Scale Deep Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06680 (2019).

 7.   Merel, J. et al. Hierarchical visuomotor control of humanoids. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.09656 (2018).


                                                           12
 8.   OpenAI et al. Learning dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International Journal of Robotics Research 39,
      3–20 (2020).

 9.   Lehman, J. et al. The Surprising Creativity of Digital Evolution: A Collection of Anecdotes from the Evolution-
      ary Computation and Artificial Life Research Communities. CoRR abs/1803.03453 (2018).

10.   Amodei, D. et al. Concrete Problems in AI Safety. CoRR abs/1606.06565 (2016).

11.   Lehman, J. & Stanley, K. O. Abandoning objectives: Evolution through the search for novelty alone. Evolution-
      ary computation 19, 189–223 (2011).

12.   Conti, E. et al. Improving exploration in evolution strategies for deep reinforcement learning via a population of
      novelty-seeking agents in Advances in neural information processing systems (2018), 5027–5038.

13.   Puigdomènech Badia, A. et al. Agent57: Outperforming the Atari Human Benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.13350
      (2020).

14.   Mnih, V. et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 518, 529–533 (2015).

15.   Aytar, Y. et al. Playing hard exploration games by watching YouTube. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.11592 (2018).

16.   Sutton, R. S. & Barto, A. G. Reinforcement learning: An introduction (Bradford, 1998).

17.   Mnih, V. et al. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning in International conference on machine
      learning (2016), 1928–1937.

18.   Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A. & Klimov, O. Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithms.
      CoRR abs/1707.06347 (2017).

19.   Mouret, J.-B. & Clune, J. Illuminating search spaces by mapping elites. arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.04909 (2015).

20.   Lehman, J. & Stanley, K. O. Evolving a diversity of virtual creatures through novelty search and local com-
      petition in GECCO ’11: Proceedings of the 13th annual conference on Genetic and evolutionary computation
      (2011), 211–218.

21.   Pugh, J. K., Soros, L. B. & Stanley, K. O. Quality Diversity: A New Frontier for Evolutionary Computation.
      Front. Robotics and AI 3. ISSN: 2296-9144 (2016).

22.   Cully, A., Clune, J., Tarapore, D. & Mouret, J.-B. Robots that can adapt like animals. Nature 521, 503–507
      (2015).

23.   Peng, X. B., Andrychowicz, M., Zaremba, W. & Abbeel, P. Sim-to-real transfer of robotic control with dynamics
      randomization in 2018 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA) (2018), 1–8.

24.   Tan, J. et al. Sim-to-real: Learning agile locomotion for quadruped robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.10332
      (2018).

25.   Hester, T. et al. Deep Q-learning From Demonstrations in AAAI (2018).


                                                          13
26.   Bellemare, M. G., Naddaf, Y., Veness, J. & Bowling, M. The Arcade Learning Environment: An evaluation
      platform for general agents. J. Artif. Intell. Res.(JAIR) 47, 253–279 (2013).

27.   Horgan, D. et al. Distributed Prioritized Experience Replay. CoRR abs/1803.00933 (2018).

28.   Espeholt, L. et al. IMPALA: Scalable Distributed Deep-RL with Importance Weighted Actor-Learner Architec-
      tures in ICML (2018).

29.   Salimans, T. & Chen, R. Learning Montezuma’s Revenge from a Single Demonstration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.03381
      (2018).

30.   Puigdomènech Badia, A. et al. Never Give Up: Learning Directed Exploration Strategies. arXiv (2020).

31.   Such, F. P. et al. Deep neuroevolution: genetic algorithms are a competitive alternative for training deep neural
      networks for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.06567 (2017).

32.   Brockman, G. et al. OpenAI gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540 (2016).

33.   ATARI VCS/2600 Scoreboard 2018. http://www.ataricompendium.com/game_library/high_
      scores/high_scores.html.

34.   Nair, A., McGrew, B., Andrychowicz, M., Zaremba, W. & Abbeel, P. Overcoming exploration in reinforce-
      ment learning with demonstrations in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA)
      (2018), 6292–6299.

35.   Kraft, D. et al. Development of object and grasping knowledge by robot exploration. IEEE Transactions on
      Autonomous Mental Development 2, 368–383 (2010).

36.   Andrychowicz, M. et al. Hindsight experience replay in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
      (2017), 5048–5058.

37.   Eysenbach, B., Salakhutdinov, R. R. & Levine, S. Search on the replay buffer: Bridging planning and reinforce-
      ment learning in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2019), 15220–15231.

38.   Oh, J., Guo, Y., Singh, S. & Lee, H. Self-Imitation Learning in ICML (2018).

39.   Guo, Y. et al. Efficient Exploration with Self-Imitation Learning via Trajectory-Conditioned Policy. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:1907.10247 (2019).

40.   Liu, H., Simonyan, K. & Yang, Y. Darts: Differentiable architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.09055
      (2018).

41.   Madotto, A. et al. Exploration Based Language Learning for Text-Based Games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08868
      (2020).

42.   Zhang, W. & Dietterich, T. G. A reinforcement learning approach to job-shop scheduling in IJCAI 95 (1995),
      1114–1120.


                                                           14
43.   Abe, N., Verma, N., Apte, C. & Schroko, R. Cross channel optimized marketing by reinforcement learning in
      Proceedings of the tenth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining
      (2004), 767–772.

44.   Popova, M., Isayev, O. & Tropsha, A. Deep reinforcement learning for de novo drug design. Science advances
      4, eaap7885 (2018).




                                                       15
Methods

State of the art on Atari With new work on RL for Atari being published on a regular basis, and with reporting
methods often varying significantly, it can be difficult to establish the state-of-the-art score for each Atari game. At
the same time, it is important to compare new algorithms with previous ones to evaluate progress.

   For determining the state-of-the-art score for each game, we considered a set of notable, recently published papers
that cover at least the particular subset of games this paper focuses on, namely hard-exploration games. Community
guidelines advocate sticky actions as a way to evaluate agents on Atari3 , and there is substantial evidence to show
that sticky actions can decrease performance substantially compared to the now deprecated no-ops evaluation strat-
egy3,45,46 . As a result, we exclude work which was only evaluated with no-ops from our definition of state of the
art. Fig. 2a includes works tested only with no-ops as they help bring context to the amount of effort expended by the
community on solving Montezuma’s Revenge. We did not include work that does not provide individualised scores for
each game. To avoid cherry-picking lucky rollouts that can bias scores upward substantially, we also exclude work that
only provided the maximum score achieved in an entire run as opposed to the average score achieved by a particular
instance of the agent.

   In total, state of the art results were extracted from the following papers: Burda et al. (2018)47 , Castro et al. (2018)45 ,
Choi et al. (2018)48 , Fedus et al. (2019)49 , Taiga et al. (2020)50 , Tang et al. (2020)51 , and Toromanoff et al. (2019)46 .
Because these works themselves report scores for several algorithms and variants, including reproductions of previous
algorithms, a total of 23 algorithms and variants were included in the state of the art assessment. For each game, the
state-of-the-art score was the highest score achieved across all algorithms.

Downscaling on Atari In the first variant of Go-Explore presented in this work (Sec. “Learning to play Atari when
returning without a policy”), the cell representation is a downscaled version of the original game frame. To obtain the
downscaled representation, (1) the original frame is converted to grayscale, (2) its resolution is reduced with pixel area
relation interpolation to a width w ≤ 160 and a height h ≤ 210, and (3) the pixel depth is reduced to d ≤ 255 using
              d·p
the formula b 255 c, where p is the value of the pixel after step (2). The parameters w, h and d are updated dynamically
by proposing different values for each, calculating how a sample of recent frames would be grouped into cells under
these proposed parameters, and then selecting the values that result in the best cell distribution (as determined by the
objective function defined below).

   The objective function for candidate downscaling parameters is calculated based on a target number of cells T
(where T is a fixed fraction of the number of cells in the sample), the actual number of cells produced by the parameters
currently considered n, and the distribution of sample frames over cells p. Its general form is

                                                                  Hn (p)
                                                    O(p, n) =                                                               (1)
                                                                  L(n, T )


                                                             16
L(n, T ) measures the discrepancy between the number of cells under the current parameters n and the target number
of cells T . It prevents the representation that is discovered from aggregating too many frames together, which would
result in low exploration, or from aggregating too few frames together, which would result in an intractable time and
memory complexity, and is defined as                         r
                                                                  n
                                                L(n, T ) =          −1 +1                                              (2)
                                                                  T

Hn (p) is the ratio of the entropy of how frames were distributed across cells to the entropy of the discrete uniform
distribution of size n, i.e. the normalised entropy. In this way, the loss encourages frames to be distributed as uniformly
as possible across cells, which is important because highly non-uniform distributions may suffer from the same lack
of exploration that excessive aggregation can produce or the same intractability that lack of aggregation can produce.
Unlike unnormalized entropy, normalised entropy is comparable across different numbers of cells, allowing the number
of cells to be controlled solely by L(n, T ). Its form is

                                                             n
                                                             X pi log(pi )
                                               Hn (p) = −                                                              (3)
                                                             i=1
                                                                   log(n)

At each step of the randomised search, new values of each parameter w, h and d are proposed by sampling from a
geometric distribution whose mean is the current best known value of the given parameter. If the current best known
value is lower than a heuristic minimum mean (8 for w, 10.5 for h and 12 for d), the heuristic minimum mean is used
as the mean of the geometric distribution. New parameter values are re-sampled if they fall outside of the valid range
for that parameter.

   The recent frames that constitute the sample over which parameter search is done are obtained by maintaining a set
of recently seen sample frames as Go-Explore runs: each time a frame not already in the set is seen during the explore
step, it is added to the running set with a probability of 1%. If the resulting set contains more than 10,000 frames, the
oldest frame it contains is removed.

Domain knowledge representations The domain knowledge representation for Pitfall consists of the current room
(out of 255) the agent is currently located in, as well as the discretized x, y position of the agent (Extended Data
Table 1a). In Montezuma’s Revenge, the representation also includes the keys currently held by the agent (including
which room they were found in) as well as the current level. Although this information can in principle be extracted
from RAM, in this work it was extracted from pixels through small hand-written classifiers, showing that domain
knowledge representations need not require access to the inner state of a simulator.

   In robotics, the domain knowledge representation is extracted from the internal state of the MuJoCo52 simulator.
However, similar information has been extracted from raw camera footage for real robots by previous work8 . It
consists of the current 3D position of the robot’s gripper, discretized in voxels with sides of length 0.5 meters, whether
the robot is currently touching (with a single grip) or grasping (touching with both grips) the object, and whether the


                                                             17
object is currently in the target shelf. In the case of the two target shelves with doors, the positions of the door and
its latch are also included. The discretization for latches and doors follows the following formula, given that d is the
distance of the latch/door from its starting position in meters: b d+0.195
                                                                     0.2 c.


Exploration phase During the exploration phase, the selection probability of a cell at each step is proportional to its
selection weight. For all treatments except Montezuma’s Revenge with domain knowledge but without a return policy,
the cell selection weight W is listed in Extended Data Table 1.

   In the case of Montezuma’s Revenge with domain knowledge but without a return policy, three additional domain
knowledge features further contribute to the weight: (1) The number of horizontal neighbours to the cell present in
the archive (h); (2) A key bonus: for each location (defined by level, room, and x,y position), the cell with the largest
number of keys at that location gets a bonus of k = 1 (k = 0 for other cells); (3) the current level. The first two values
contribute to the location weight
                                                              2−h
                                                Wlocation =       + k.                                                (4)
                                                               10

This value is then combined with W above as well as the level of the given cell l and the maximum level in the archive
L to obtain the final weight for Montezuma’s Revenge with domain knowledge:


                                      Wmont domain = 0.1L−l (W + Wlocation ) .                                        (5)


While it is possible to produce an analogous domain knowledge cell selection weight for Pitfall with domain knowl-
edge, no such weight produced any substantial improvement over W alone.

   Unless otherwise specified, once a cell is returned to, exploration proceeds with random actions for a number of
steps (100 in Atari, 30 in robotics), or until the end of episode signal is received from the environment. In Atari,
where the action set is discrete, actions are chosen uniformly at random. In robotics, each of the 9 continuous-valued
components of the action is sampled independently and uniformly from the interval from -1 to 1. To help explore in a
consistent direction, the probability of repeating the previous action is 95% for Atari and 90% for robotics.

   For increased efficiency, the exploration phase is processed in parallel by selecting a batch of return cells and
exploring from each one of them across multiple processes. In all runs without a return policy, the batch size is 100.

Evaluation In Atari, the score of an exploration phase run is measured as the highest score ever achieved at end of
episode. This score is tracked by maintaining a virtual cell corresponding to the end of the episode. An alternative
approach would be to track the maximum score across all cells in the archive, regardless of whether they correspond
to the end of episode, but this approach fails in games where rewards can be negative (e.g. Skiing): in these cases, it
is possible that the maximum scoring cell in the archive inevitably leads to future negative rewards, and is therefore
not a good representation of the maximum score achievable in the game. In practice, for games in which rewards are


                                                           18
non-negative, the maximum score at end of episode is usually equal or close to the maximum score achieved in the
entire archive. For the 11 focus games, exploration phase scores are averaged across 50 exploration phase runs. For
the other games, they are averaged across 5 runs. For domain knowledge, they are averaged across 100 runs.

   During robustification in Atari, a checkpoint is produced every 100 training iterations (13,926,400 frames). A
subset of checkpoints corresponding to points during which the rolling average of scores seen during training was at
its highest are tested by averaging their scores across 100 test episodes. Then the highest scoring checkpoint found is
retested with 1,000 new test episodes to eliminate selection bias. For the downscaled representation, robustification
scores are averaged over 5 runs. For domain knowledge, they are averaged across 10 runs. All testing is performed
with sticky actions (see “State of the art on Atari”). To accurately compare against the human world record of 1.2
million33 , we patched an ALE bug that prevents the score from exceeding 1 million (Supplementary Information
“ALE issues”).

   The exploration phase for robotics was evaluated across 50 runs per target shelf, for a total of 200 runs. The
reported metric is the proportion of runs that discovered a successful trajectory. Because the outcome of a robotics
episode is binary (success or failure), there is no reason to continue robustification once the agent is reliably successful
(unlike with Atari where it is usually possible to further improve the score). Thus, robustification runs for robotics are
terminated once they keep a success rate greater than 98.5% for over 150 training iterations (19,660,800 frames), and
the runs are then considered successful. To ensure that the agent learns to keep the object inside of the shelf, a penalty
of -1 is given for taking the object outside of the shelf, and during robustification the agent is given up to 54 additional
steps after successfully putting the object in the shelf (see “Extra frame coef” in Extended Data Table 1a), forcing it to
ensure the object doesn’t leave the shelf. Out of 200 runs (50 per target shelf), 2 runs did not succeed after running for
over 3 billion frames (whereas all other runs succeeded in fewer than 2 billion) and were thus considered unsuccessful
(one for the bottom left shelf and the other for the bottom right shelf), resulting in a 99% overall success rate.

   The robotics results are compared to two controls. First, to confirm the hard-exploration nature of the environment,
5 runs per target shelf of ordinary PPO18 with no exploration mechanism were run for 1 billion frames. At no point
during these runs were any rewards found, confirming that the robotics problem in this paper constitutes a hard-
exploration challenge. Secondly, we ran 10 runs per target shelf for 2 billion frames of ordinary PPO augmented
with count-based intrinsic rewards, one of the best modern versions of intrinsic motivation1,50,53,54 designed to deal
with hard-exploration challenges. The representation for this control is identical to the one used in the exploration
phase, so as to provide a fair comparison. Similar to the exploration phase, the counts for each cell are incremented
each time the agent enters a cell for the first time in an episode, and the intrinsic reward is given by    √1 ,   similar to
                                                                                                              n

W . Because it is possible (though rare) for the agent to place the object out of reach, a per-episode time limit is
necessary to ensure that not too many training frames are wasted on such unrecoverable states. In robustification, the
time limit is implicitly given by the length of the demonstration combined with the additional time described above



                                                            19
and in Extended Data Table 1a. For the controls, a limit of 300 time steps was given as it provides ample time to solve
the environment (Extended Data Figure 5b), while ensuring that the object is almost always in range of the robot arm
throughout training. As shown in Fig. 4b, this control was unable to find anywhere near the number of cells found by
the exploration phase, despite of running for significantly longer, and as shown in Fig. 4c, it also was unable to find
any rewards in spite of running for longer than any successful Go-Explore run (counting both the exploration phase
and robustification phase combined).

Hyperparameters Hyperparameters are reported in Extended Data Table 1. Extended Data Table 1b reports the
hyperparameters specific to the Atari environment. Of note are the use of sticky actions as recommended by Machado
et al. (2018)3 , and the fact that the agent acts every 4 frames, as is typical in RL for Atari14 . In this work, sample
complexity is always reported in terms of raw Atari frames, so that the number of actions can be obtained by dividing
by 4. In robotics, the agent acts 12.5 times per second. Each action is simulated with a timestep granularity of 0.001
seconds, corresponding to 80 simulator steps for every action taken.

   While the robustification algorithm originates from Salimans & Chen (2018)29 , it was modified in various ways
(Supplementary Information “The backward algorithm”). Extended Data Table 1a shows the hyperparameters for
this algorithm used in this work, to the extent that they are different from those in the original paper, or were added
due to the modifications in this work. Extended Data Tables 2a and 2b show the state representation for robotics
robustification.

   With the downscaled representation on Atari, the exploration phase was run for 2 billion frames prior to extract-
ing demonstrations for robustification. Because exploration phase performance was slightly below human on Pitfall,
Skiing and Private Eye, the exploration phase was allowed to run longer on these three games (5 billion for Pitfall
and Skiing, 15 billion for Private Eye) to demonstrate that it can exceed human performance on all Atari games. The
demonstrations used to robustify these three games were still extracted after 2 billion frames, and the robustified poli-
cies still exceeded average human performance thanks to the ability of robustification to improve upon demonstration
performance. With the domain knowledge representation on Atari, the exploration phase ran for 1 billion frames.
Robustification ran for 10 billion frames on all Atari games except Solaris (20 billion) and Pitfall when using domain
knowledge demonstrations (15 billion). On robotics, the exploration phase ran for 20 million frames and details for
the robustification phase are given in the Evaluation section.

Policy-based Go-Explore The idea in policy-based Go-Explore is to learn how to return (rather than to restore
archived simulator states to return). The algorithm builds off the popular PPO algorithm18 described in Supplementary
Information. At the heart of policy-based Go-Explore lies a goal-conditioned policy πθ (a|s, g) (Extended Data Fig. 6),
parameterized by θ, that takes a state s and a goal g and defines a probability distribution over actions a. Policy-based
Go-Explore includes all PPO loss functions described in Supplementary Information, except that instances of the state
s are replaced with the state-goal tuple (s, g). The total reward rt is the sum of the trajectory reward rtτ (defined be-


                                                           20
low) and the environment reward rte , where rte is clipped to the [−2, 2] range. Policy-based Go-Explore also includes
self-imitation learning (SIL)38 (Supplementary Information), where SIL actors follow the same procedure as regular
actors, except that they replay the trajectory associated with the cell they select from the archive. Hyperparameters are
listed in Extended Data Table 1a.

    To fit the batch-oriented paradigm, policy-based Go-Explore updates its archive after every mini-batch (Extended
Data Fig. 6). In addition, the “go” step now involves executing actions in the environment (as explained below), and
each actor independently tracks whether it is in the “go” step or the “explore” step of the algorithm. For the purpose
of updating the archive, no distinction is made between data gathered during the “go” step and data gathered during
the “explore” step, meaning policy-based Go-Explore can discover new cells or update existing cells while returning.

    For the experiments presented in this paper, data is gathered in episodes. Whenever an actor starts a new episode,
it selects a state from the archive according to the Go-Explore selection procedure and starts executing the “go”
step. Here, policy-based Go-Explore relies on its goal-conditioned policy to reach the selected state, which enables
it to be applied without assuming access to a deterministic or restorable environment during the exploration phase.
It is exceedingly difficult and practically unnecessary to reach a particular state exactly, so instead, the policy is
conditioned to reach the cell associated with this state, referred to as the goal cell, provided to the policy in the form
of a concatenated one-hot encoding for every attribute characterizing the cell. Directly providing the goal cell to
the goal-conditioned policy did not perform well in preliminary experiments, presumably because goal-conditioned
policies tend to falter when goals become distant37 . Instead, the actor is iteratively conditioned on the successive cells
traversed by the archived trajectory that leads to the goal cell.

    Here, we allow the agent to follow the archived trajectory in a soft-order, a method similar to the one described
in Guo et al. (2019)39 . To prevent the soft-trajectory from being affected by the time an agent spends in a cell, the
algorithm first constructs a trajectory of non-repeated cells, collapsing any consecutive sequence of identical cells into
a single cell. Then, given a window size Nw = 10, if the agent is supposed to reach a specific goal cell in this trajectory
and it reaches that or any of the subsequent 9 cells in this trajectory, the goal is considered met. When a goal is met,
the agent receives a trajectory reward rtτ of 1 and the subsequent goal in the non-repeated trajectory (i.e. the goal that
comes after the cell that was actually reached) is set as the next goal. When the cell that was reached occurs multiple
times in the window (indicating cycles) the next goal is the one that follows the last occurrence of this repeated goal
cell.

    As soon as an agent reaches the last cell in the trajectory, it receives a trajectory reward rtτ of 3 and executes
the “explore” step, either through policy exploration or random exploration. With policy exploration, the agent will
select a goal for the policy according to one of three rules: (1) with 10% probability, randomly select an adjacent cell
(see “Exploration phase”) not in the archive, (2) with 22.5% probability, select any adjacent cell, whether already in
the archive or not, and (3), in the remaining 67.5% of cases, select a cell from the archive according to the standard


                                                            21
cell-selection weights. If the first rule does not apply because all adjacent cells are already in the archive, rules 2 and 3
are selected with proportionally scaled probabilities. Note that, in the exploration step, the agent is presented directly
with the goal, rather than with a trajectory. Whenever the current exploration goal is reached, or if the goal is not
reached for some number of steps (here 100), a new exploration goal is chosen. With random exploration, the agent
takes random actions according to the random exploration procedure described in Methods “Exploration phase”. All
gathered data is ignored with respect to calculating the loss of the policy.

      While following a trajectory or during exploration, it is possible for the agent to fail to make progress towards the
current goal cell because the policy has converged towards putting all its probability mass on a small set of actions,
meaning the policy performs insufficient exploration to discover the goal and observe its reward. To alleviate this
issue, in addition to having the entropy bonus LEN T , the policy is extended with an entropy term et that divides the
logits of the policy right before the softmax activation function is applied. If the agent fails to reach the current goal
for some number of steps eTt (defined below), this entropy term is increased following:


                                           et (t̂) = 1 + (max(0, t̂ − eTt ) · ef )ep                                     (6)


where t̂ is the number of steps the agent has taken since it last reached a goal (for returning) or discovered a new cell
(for exploring), ef = 0.01 is the entropy increase factor and ep = 2 is the entropy increase power. While executing the
“explore” step, the threshold eTt has a fixed value of 50. While returning, the threshold eTt equals the number of actions
that the followed trajectory required to move from the previously reached goal cell to the current goal cell. Here, the
previously reached goal cell refers to the first cell in the soft-trajectory window that matched the cell occupied by the
agent at the time the previous goal was considered met.

      Lastly, to prevent actors from spending many time steps without making any progress (possibly because the agent
reached a state from which further progress is impossible), we terminate the episode early if the current goal is not
reached within 1,000 steps after we have started to increase entropy (while returning), or if no new cells are discovered
for 1,000 steps (while exploring). For Montezuma’s Revenge with policy-based Go-Explore only, we also terminate
the episode on death to deal with an ALE bug (details in Supplemental Information).

Data availability The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon
reasonable request.

Code availability The Go-Explore code is available at: https://github.com/uber-research/go-explore.


References

45.     Castro, P. S., Moitra, S., Gelada, C., Kumar, S. & Bellemare, M. G. Dopamine: A research framework for deep
        reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.06110 (2018).


                                                              22
46.     Toromanoff, M., Wirbel, E. & Moutarde, F. Is Deep Reinforcement Learning Really Superhuman on Atari? arXiv
        preprint arXiv:1908.04683 (2019).

47.     Burda, Y., Edwards, H., Storkey, A. & Klimov, O. Exploration by random network distillation. arXiv preprint
        arXiv:1810.12894 (2018).

48.     Choi, J. et al. Contingency-Aware Exploration in Reinforcement Learning. CoRR abs/1811.01483 (2018).

49.     Fedus, W., Gelada, C., Bengio, Y., Bellemare, M. G. & Larochelle, H. Hyperbolic discounting and learning over
        multiple horizons. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.06865 (2019).

50.     Taiga, A. A., Fedus, W., Machado, M. C., Courville, A. & Bellemare, M. G. On Bonus Based Exploration
        Methods In The Arcade Learning Environment in International Conference on Learning Representations (2020).

51.     Tang, Y., Valko, M. & Munos, R. Taylor expansion policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.06259 (2020).

52.     Todorov, E., Erez, T. & Tassa, Y. MuJoCo: A physics engine for model-based control in IROS (2012), 5026–5033.

53.     Strehl, A. L. & Littman, M. L. An analysis of model-based interval estimation for Markov decision processes.
        Journal of Computer and System Sciences 74, 1309–1331 (2008).

54.     Tang, H. et al. # Exploration: A Study of Count-Based Exploration for Deep Reinforcement Learning in NIPS
        (2017), 2750–2759.

55.     Cho, K., Van Merriënboer, B., Bahdanau, D. & Bengio, Y. On the properties of neural machine translation:
        Encoder-decoder approaches. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1259 (2014).


Acknowledgements We thank Ashley Edwards, Sanyam Kapoor, Felipe Petroski Such and Jiale Zhi for their ideas, feedback, technical support, and work on aspects
of Go-Explore not presented in this work. We are grateful to the Colorado Data Center and OpusStack Teams at Uber for providing our computing platform. We thank
Vikash Kumar for creating the MuJoCo files that served as the basis for or robotics environment (https://github.com/vikashplus/fetch).


Correspondence     should be addressed to Adrien Ecoffet (email: adrien.ecoffet@gmail.com), Joost Huizinga (email: joost.hui@gmail.com), and Jeff Clune (email:
jclune@gmail.com).




                                                                                  23
Extended Data
       Input
       Filters: 12
       Shape: 80*105                                                                                                FC2           GRU
                                 C1                 C2                   C3                    FC1                  Size: 800     Size: 800
                                 Filters: 64        Filters: 128         Filters: 128          Size: 6912           Act.: Relu                Act.: Softmax
                                 Shape: 19*25       Shape: 8*11          Shape: 6*9                                 Layer Norm
  st                             Act.: Relu         Act.: Relu           Act.: Relu                                                                  πt

                                                                                                                                                     vt

                                                                                                                                  Fully connected:
                            Filter size: 8      Filter size: 4         Filter size: 3        Flatten
                            Stride: 4           Stride: 2              Stride: 1                                                      Convolution:

                                                                 (a) Atari architecture.
  Input                                                                                 Input
               FC1          FC2                                                                        FC1           FC2
  Size: 604                                                                             Size: 604
               Size: 256    Size: 128                    Output                                        Size: 256     Size: 128
               Act.: Relu   Act.: Relu       GRU         Size: 9                                       Act.: Relu    Act.: Relu     GRU
                            Layer Norm       Size: 128   Act.: None                                                  Layer Norm     Size: 128
                                                                                                                                                 Output
                                                                  μt                                                                             Size: 1
                                                                                                                                                 Act.: None
  st                                                     Size: 9       πt               st                                                             vt
                                                         Act.: Exp
                                                                  σt

                                                                                                                                  Fully connected:

                                                             (b) Robotics architecture.
       Input
       Filters: 12
       Shape: 80*105                                                                         FC1                    FC2           GRU
                                 C1                 C2                   C3                  Size: 307+6912         Size: 800     Size: 800
                                 Filters: 64        Filters: 128         Filters: 128                               Act.: Relu                Act.: Softmax
                                 Shape: 19*25       Shape: 8*11          Shape: 6*9             gt                  Layer Norm
  st                             Act.: Relu         Act.: Relu           Act.: Relu                                                                  πt

                                                                                                                                                     vt

                                                                                                                                  Fully connected:
                            Filter size: 8      Filter size: 4         Filter size: 3        Flatten
                            Stride: 4           Stride: 2              Stride: 1                                                      Convolution:

                                                  (c) Policy-based Go-Explore architecture.

Extended Data Figure 1: Neural network architectures. (a) The Atari architecture is based on the architecture
provided with the backward algorithm implementation. The input consists of the RGB channels of the last four frames
(re-scaled to 80 by 105 pixels) concatenated, resulting in 12 input channels. The network consists of 3 convolutional
layers, 2 fully connected layers, and a layer of Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs)55 . The network has a policy head
π(s|a) and a value head V (s). (b) For the robotics problem, the architecture consists of two separate networks, each
with 2 fully connected layers and a GRU layer. One network specifies the policy π(s|a) by returning a mean µ and
variance σ for the actuator torques of the arm and the desired position of each of the two fingers of the gripper (gripper
fingers are implemented as Mujoco position actuators52 with kp = 104 and a control range of [0, 0.05]). The other
network implements the value function V (s). (c) The architecture for policy-based Go-Explore is identical to the Atari
architecture, except that the goal representation g is concatenated with the input of the first fully connected layer.




                                                                            24
                                                                                                                                                      Avg. Human                    SOTA                Go-Explore
                                    Alien                                        Amidar                                         Assault                                          Asterix                                         Asteroids                                   Atlantis                                  BankHeist
            1M                                                                                                                                               1M
                                                            20K                                                                                                                                              150K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         800K                                        4K
           800K                                                                                           30K                                               800K                                             125K
                                                            15K
           600K                                                                                                                                             600K                                             100K                                        600K                                        3K
                                                                                                          20K
   Score




                                                            10K                                                                                                                                               75K                                        400K
           400K                                                                                                                                             400K                                                                                                                                     2K
                                                                                                          10K                                                                                                 50K
           200K                                              5K                                                                                             200K                                                                                         200K
                                                                                                                                                                                                              25K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1K
              0                                                0                                             0                                                 0                                                0                                           0
                   0.0   0.5         1.0        1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5       1.0       1.5    2.0          0.0   0.5        1.0         1.5     2.0          0.0   0.5         1.0       1.5     2.0          0.0   0.5       1.0      1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5        1.0       1.5   2.0
                                                      1e9                                           1e9                                               1e9                                              1e9                                         1e9                                        1e9                                           1e9
                               BattleZone                                      BeamRider                                        Berzerk                                         Bowling                                           Boxing                                    Breakout                                   Centipede
            1M                                              500K                                                                                             250                                              100
                                                                                                          125K                                                                                                                                            800                                       600K
           800K                                             400K                                                                                                                                               80                                                                                   500K
                                                                                                          100K                                               200                                                                                          600
           600K                                             300K                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    400K
                                                                                                          75K                                                                                                  60
   Score




                                                            200K                                                                                             150                                                                                          400                                       300K
           400K                                                                                           50K                                                                                                  40                                                                                   200K
           200K                                             100K                                          25K                                                100                                                                                          200
                                                                                                                                                                                                               20                                                                                   100K
              0                                                0                                             0                                                                                                                                              0                                          0
                   0.0   0.5         1.0        1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5       1.0       1.5    2.0          0.0   0.5        1.0         1.5     2.0          0.0   0.5         1.0       1.5     2.0          0.0   0.5       1.0      1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5        1.0       1.5   2.0
                                                      1e9                                           1e9                                               1e9                                              1e9                                         1e9                                        1e9                                           1e9
                         ChopperCommand                                    CrazyClimber                                   DemonAttack                                          DoubleDunk                                         Enduro                                FishingDerby                                    Freeway
            1M                                              350K                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      34
                                                                                                          250K                                                20                                                                                           80
           800K                                             300K                                                                                                                                              2K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                            250K                                          200K                                                                                                                                                                                        32
           600K                                                                                                                                               10                                             1.5K                                          40
                                                            200K                                          150K
   Score




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
           400K                                             150K                                          100K                                                 0                                              1K                                                                                      30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
           200K                                             100K                                          50K                                                                                                 500
                                                                                                                                                             -10                                                                                          -20                                         28
                                                             50K
              0                                                                                              0                                                                                                                                            -40
                   0.0   0.5         1.0        1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5       1.0       1.5    2.0          0.0   0.5        1.0         1.5     2.0          0.0   0.5         1.0       1.5     2.0          0.0   0.5       1.0      1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5        1.0       1.5   2.0
                                                      1e9                                           1e9                                               1e9                                              1e9                                         1e9                                        1e9                                           1e9
                                Frostbite                                        Gopher                                         Gravitar                                            Hero                                        IceHockey                                   Jamesbond                                  Kangaroo
            1M                                              150K                                                                                            50K                                                                                                                                     30K
                                                                                                          14K                                                                                                                                            200K
           800K                                             125K                                          12K                                                                                                                                                                                       25K
                                                                                                                                                            40K                                                30                                        150K
                                                            100K                                          10K                                                                                                                                                                                       20K
           600K
   Score




                                                            75K                                            8K                                               30K                                                20                                        100K                                       15K
           400K
                                                            50K                                            6K                                                                                                                                                                                       10K
           200K                                                                                                                                             20K                                                10                                        50K
                                                            25K                                            4K                                                                                                                                                                                        5K
              0                                                0                                           2K                                                                                                   0                                           0
                   0.0   0.5         1.0        1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5       1.0       1.5    2.0          0.0   0.5        1.0         1.5     2.0          0.0   0.5         1.0       1.5     2.0          0.0   0.5       1.0      1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5        1.0       1.5   2.0
                                                      1e9                                           1e9                                               1e9                                              1e9                                         1e9                                        1e9                                           1e9
                                    Krull                                  KungFuMaster                                MontezumaRevenge                                        MsPacman                                    NameThisGame                                      Phoenix                                     Pitfall
                                                                                                                                                            500K                                                                                         150K
            60K                                             40K                                           25K                                                                                                200K                                        125K                                        8K
                                                                                                                                                            400K
                                                                                                          20K                                                                                                                                            100K
                                                            30K                                                                                             300K                                             150K                                                                                    6K
            40K                                                                                           15K
    Score




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         75K                                         4K
                                                            20K                                                                                             200K                                             100K
                                                                                                          10K                                                                                                                                            50K
            20K
                                                                                                           5K                                               100K                                             50K                                                                                     2K
                                                            10K                                                                                                                                                                                          25K
              0                                                                                              0                                                 0                                                0                                           0                                          0
                   0.0   0.5         1.0        1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5       1.0       1.5    2.0          0.0   0.5        1.0         1.5     2.0          0.0   0.5         1.0       1.5     2.0          0.0   0.5       1.0      1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5   2.0          0     1      2         3     4    5
                                                      1e9                                           1e9                                               1e9                                              1e9                                         1e9                                        1e9                                           1e9
                                    Pong                                       PrivateEye                                        Qbert                                          Riverraid                                       RoadRunner                                  Robotank                                   Seaquest
                                                            80K                                            1M                                               40K                                               1M
              20                                            70K                                                                                                                                                                                           125                                       500K
                                                                                                          800K                                              30K                                              800K
                                                            60K                                                                                                                                                                                           100                                       400K
                                                                                                          600K                                                                                               600K
              18                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    300K
      Score




                                                            50K                                                                                             20K                                                                                            75
                                                                                                          400K                                                                                               400K                                                                                   200K
                                                            40K                                                                                                                                                                                            50
              16                                                                                          200K                                              10K                                              200K                                                                                   100K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           25
                                                            30K
                                                                                                             0                                                                                                  0                                           0                                          0
                   0.0   0.5         1.0        1.5   2.0          0.0     0.5             1.0      1.5          0.0   0.5        1.0         1.5     2.0          0.0   0.5         1.0       1.5     2.0          0.0   0.5       1.0      1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5        1.0       1.5   2.0
                                                      1e9                                          1e10                                               1e9                                              1e9                                         1e9                                        1e9                                           1e9
                                 Skiing                                          Solaris                                 SpaceInvaders                                         StarGunner                                         Tennis                                    TimePilot                                  Tutankham
            -4K                                                                                                                                             800K                                                                                                                                     700
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         200K
            -5K                                             20K                                           80K                                                                                                  20                                                                                    600
                                                                                                                                                            600K
            -6K                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          150K                                        500
                                                            15K                                           60K
            -7K                                                                                                                                                                                                10
   Score




                                                                                                                                                            400K                                                                                                                                     400
                                                                                                          40K                                                                                                                                            100K
            -8K                                             10K                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      300
            -9K                                                                                           20K                                               200K                                                0                                        50K                                         200
           -10K                                              5K
                                                                                                             0                                                 0                                                                                            0                                        100
                   0     1      2           3     4    5           0.0   0.5       1.0       1.5    2.0          0.0   0.5        1.0         1.5     2.0          0.0   0.5         1.0       1.5     2.0          0.0   0.5       1.0      1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0         1.5   2.0
                                                      1e9                                           1e9                                               1e9                                              1e9                                         1e9                                        1e9                       Frames              1e9
                               UpNDown                                          Venture                                      VideoPinball                                  WizardOfWor                                        YarsRevenge                                    Zaxxon
           600K                                                                                            1M                                               200K                                              1M
                                                             3K                                                                                                                                                                                          25K
           500K
                                                                                                          800K                                              150K                                             800K
           400K                                             2.5K                                                                                                                                                                                         20K
                                                                                                          600K                                                                                               600K
   Score




           300K                                                                                                                                             100K                                                                                         15K
                                                             2K                                           400K
           200K                                                                                                                                                                                              400K
                                                            1.5K                                          200K                                              50K                                                                                          10K
           100K                                                                                                                                                                                              200K
              0                                                                                              0                                                 0                                                0                                         5K
                   0.0   0.5       1.0          1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5       1.0       1.5    2.0          0.0   0.5         1.0        1.5     2.0          0.0   0.5          1.0      1.5     2.0          0.0   0.5       1.0      1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5       1.0     1.5   2.0
                                 Frames               1e9                        Frames             1e9                          Frames               1e9                           Frames             1e9                        Frames           1e9                        Frames          1e9


                                                                                                          (a) Exploration phase without domain knowledge.
                                                                                                                                           Downscaled              Domain Knowledge                  SOTA           Avg. Human
                                                                                                                                              MontezumaRevenge                                               Pitfall
                                                                                                                                150K

                                                                                                                                100K                                                  40K
                                                                                                                        Score




                                                                                                                                 50K                                                  20K

                                                                                                                                    0                                                      0
                                                                                                                                        0.0         0.5     1.0 1.5         2.0                0             2            4
                                                                                                                                                          Frames           1e9                               Frames              1e9


                                                                          (b) Exploration phase with domain knowledge (compared to downscaled)
                                                                                                                                                                                .
Extended Data Figure 2: Maximum end-of-episode score found by the exploration phase on Atari. Because only
scores achieved at the episode end are reported, the plots for some games (e.g. Solaris) begin after the start of the run,
when the episode end is first reached. In (a), averaging is over 50 runs for the 11 focus games and 5 runs for other
games. In (b), averaging is over 100 runs.


                                                                                                                                                                           25
                                            Alien                                       Amidar                                                    Assault                                   Asterix                                    Asteroids                                  Atlantis                                 BankHeist
                    30K                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         30K
                                                                                                                 80K                                                     20K                                         30K                                                                                   12.5K
                                                                     30K
  Number of Cells



                                                                                                                 60K                                                                                                                                                                                         10K
                    20K                                                                                                                                                  15K                                         20K                                        20K
                                                                     20K                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7.5K
                                                                                                                 40K                                                     10K
                    10K                                                                                                                                                                                              10K                                        10K                                           5K
                                                                     10K                                         20K                                                     5K                                                                                                                                 2.5K
                          0                                            0                                           0                                                       0                                           0                                          0                                            0
                              0.0    0.5        1.0    1.5    2.0           0.0   0.5     1.0     1.5     2.0           0.0    0.5                  1.0     1.5    2.0         0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0         0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0           0.0   0.5        1.0   1.5    2.0
                                                             1e9                                         1e9                                                      1e9                                        1e9                                         1e9                                        1e9                                         1e9
                                       BattleZone                                   BeamRider                                                     Berzerk                                  Bowling                                      Boxing                                    Breakout                                 Centipede
                    50K                                                                                         12.5K                                                    10K                                          8K                                        25K                                         20K
                                                                     40K
                    40K                                                                                           10K                                                     8K                                                                                    20K
  Number of Cells




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6K                                                                                    15K
                    30K                                              30K                                                                                                                                                                                        15K
                                                                                                                 7.5K                                                     6K
                                                                     20K                                                                                                                                              4K                                                                                    10K
                    20K                                                                                            5K                                                     4K                                                                                    10K
                    10K                                              10K                                         2.5K                                                     2K                                          2K                                         5K                                          5K
                      0                                                0                                            0                                                      0                                           0                                          0                                           0
                              0.0    0.5        1.0    1.5    2.0           0.0   0.5     1.0     1.5     2.0           0.0    0.5                  1.0     1.5    2.0         0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0         0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0           0.0   0.5        1.0   1.5    2.0
                                                             1e9                                         1e9                                                      1e9                                        1e9                                         1e9                                        1e9                                         1e9
                                    ChopperCommand                                 CrazyClimber                                   DemonAttack                            10K
                                                                                                                                                                                      DoubleDunk                                        Enduro                               FishingDerby                                      Freeway
                                                                                                                 40K                                                                                                                                            30K                                        12.5K
                    40K                                              30K                                                                                                                                             30K
                                                                                                                                                                          8K                                                                                                                                 10K
  Number of Cells




                                                                                                                 30K
                    30K                                                                                                                                                   6K                                         20K                                        20K
                                                                     20K                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7.5K
                    20K                                                                                          20K
                                                                                                                                                                          4K                                                                                                                                  5K
                                                                     10K                                                                                                                                             10K                                        10K
                    10K                                                                                          10K                                                      2K                                                                                                                                2.5K
                          0                                            0                                           0                                                       0                                           0                                          0                                            0
                              0.0    0.5        1.0    1.5    2.0           0.0   0.5     1.0     1.5     2.0           0.0    0.5                  1.0     1.5    2.0         0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0         0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0           0.0   0.5        1.0   1.5    2.0
                                                             1e9                                         1e9                                                      1e9                                        1e9                                         1e9                                        1e9                                         1e9
                                           Frostbite                                    Gopher                                               Gravitar                                        Hero                                  IceHockey                                  Jamesbond                                        Kangaroo
                    15K                                              20K                                         25K                                                                                                                                                                                        30K
                                                                                                                                                                         6K                                          20K                                        30K
                                                                                                                 20K
  Number of Cells




                                                                     15K                                                                                                                                             15K
                    10K                                                                                          15K                                                     4K                                                                                                                                 20K
                                                                     10K                                                                                                                                                                                        20K
                                                                                                                 10K                                                                                                 10K
                         5K                                                                                                                                              2K                                                                                     10K                                         10K
                                                                      5K                                          5K                                                                                                  5K
                          0                                            0                                           0                                                       0                                           0                                          0                                           0
                              0.0    0.5        1.0    1.5    2.0           0.0   0.5     1.0     1.5     2.0           0.0    0.5                  1.0     1.5    2.0         0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0         0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0           0.0   0.5        1.0   1.5    2.0
                                                             1e9                                         1e9                                                      1e9                                        1e9                                         1e9                                        1e9                                         1e9
                                             Krull                                KungFuMaster                                MontezumaRevenge                                         MsPacman                                  NameThisGame                                     Phoenix                                       Pitfall
                                                                                                                 25K                                                     30K                                                                                    30K                                         10K
                    60K                                              30K                                                                                                                                             30K
                                                                                                                 20K                                                                                                                                                                                         8K
  Number of Cells




                    40K                                                                                          15K                                                     20K                                                                                    20K                                          6K
                                                                     20K                                                                                                                                             20K
                                                                                                                 10K                                                                                                                                                                                         4K
                    20K                                              10K                                                                                                 10K                                         10K                                        10K
                                                                                                                  5K                                                                                                                                                                                         2K
                          0                                            0                                           0                                                       0                                           0                                          0                                           0
                              0.0    0.5        1.0    1.5    2.0           0.0   0.5     1.0     1.5     2.0           0.0    0.5                  1.0     1.5    2.0         0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0         0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0           0            2           4
                                                             1e9                                         1e9                                                      1e9                                        1e9                                         1e9                                        1e9                                         1e9
                                            Pong                                    PrivateEye                                                    Qbert                                    Riverraid                              RoadRunner                                      Robotank                                     Seaquest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20K                                        40K                                         40K
                    30K                                             12.5K                                        30K                                                     8K
                                                                      10K                                                                                                                                                                                       30K
  Number of Cells




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15K                                                                                    30K
                    20K                                                                                          20K                                                     6K
                                                                     7.5K                                                                                                                                            10K                                        20K                                         20K
                                                                                                                                                                         4K
                    10K                                                5K                                        10K
                                                                                                                                                                         2K                                           5K                                        10K                                         10K
                                                                     2.5K
                          0                                             0                                          0                                                       0                                           0                                          0                                           0
                              0.0    0.5        1.0    1.5    2.0           0.0     0.5         1.0       1.5           0.0    0.5                  1.0     1.5    2.0         0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0         0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0           0.0   0.5        1.0   1.5    2.0
                                                             1e9                                        1e10                                                      1e9                                        1e9                                         1e9                                        1e9                                         1e9
                                            Skiing                                      Solaris                                 SpaceInvaders                                          StarGunner                                       Tennis                                    TimePilot                                Tutankham
                                                                                                                 20K                                                                                                                                            30K                                         40K
                         8K
                                                                     15K                                                                                                 30K                                         10K
                                                                                                                 15K
       Number of Cells




                         6K                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7.5K                                        20K
                                                                     10K                                                                                                 20K
                         4K                                                                                      10K                                                                                                                                                                                        20K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5K
                                                                      5K                                                                                                 10K                                                                                    10K
                         2K                                                                                       5K                                                                                                2.5K                                                                                    10K
                          0                                            0                                           0                                                       0                                           0                                          0                                           0
                              0             2            4                  0.0   0.5     1.0     1.5     2.0           0.0    0.5                  1.0     1.5    2.0         0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0         0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5    2.0           0.0   0.5      1.0 1.5        2.0
                                                             1e9                                         1e9                                                      1e9                                        1e9                                         1e9                                        1e9                         Frames          1e9
                                           UpNDown                                      Venture                                      VideoPinball                        6K
                                                                                                                                                                                      WizardOfWor                                 YarsRevenge                                     Zaxxon
                    15K                                                                                          40K                                                                                                                                            25K
                                                                     20K
                                                                                                                 30K                                                                                                                                            20K
  Number of Cells




                    10K                                              15K                                                                                                 4K                                          20K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15K
                                                                     10K                                         20K
                                                                                                                                                                         2K                                          10K                                        10K
                         5K                                                                                      10K
                                                                      5K                                                                                                                                                                                         5K
                          0                                            0                                           0                                                       0                                           0                                          0
                              0.0    0.5      1.0 1.5         2.0           0.0   0.5     1.0 1.5         2.0           0.0    0.5                  1.0 1.5        2.0         0.0   0.5      1.0 1.5         2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0 1.5         2.0         0.0   0.5      1.0 1.5         2.0
                                            Frames           1e9                        Frames           1e9                                      Frames          1e9                       Frames           1e9                        Frames           1e9                       Frames           1e9


                                                                                                                  (a) Exploration phase without domain knowledge.
                                                                                                                                                            MontezumaRevenge                                        Pitfall
                                                                                                                                                                                              15K
                                                                                                                                                  80K
                                                                                                                                Number of Cells




                                                                                                                                                  60K                                         10K
                                                                                                                                                  40K
                                                                                                                                                                                               5K
                                                                                                                                                  20K
                                                                                                                                                    0                                           0
                                                                                                                                                        0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00                    0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                                                                                                                                                                  Frames    1e9                               Frames    1e9


                                                                                                                        (b) Exploration phase with domain knowledge.

Extended Data Figure 3: Number of cells in archive during the exploration phase on Atari. In (a), archive size can
decrease when the representation is recomputed. Previous archives are converted to the new format when the repre-
sentation is recomputed, possibly leading to an archive larger than 50K. In this case, one iteration of the exploration
phase runs and the representation is recomputed again.



                                                                                                                                                                                       26
                                                                               Avg. Human             SOTA            Go-Explore
                       Berzerk                                            Bowling                                            Centipede                                    Freeway
                                                 250
        200K                                                                                         1.25M                                                  30
                                                 200                                                        1M
        150K                                                                                                                                                20
                                                 150                                                  750K
Score




        100K                                     100                                                  500K
                                                                                                                                                            10
         50K                                      50                                                  250K
           0                                          0                                                      0                                               0
               0   2   4     6    8                       0        2      4         6     8                      0    2       4             6   8                0   2    4     6     8
                                         1e9                                                   1e9                                                  1e9                                   1e9
                       Gravitar                                    MontezumaRevenge                                               Pitfall                                PrivateEye
         10K                                                                                                                                              100K
                                                 40K                                                        6K
         8K                                                                                                                                               80K
                                                 30K
         6K                                                                                                 4K                                            60K
 Score




         4K                                      20K
                                                                                                                                                          40K
                                                                                                            2K
         2K                                      10K                                                                                                      20K
           0                                          0                                                      0                                               0
               0   2   4     6    8                       0        2      4         6     8                      0    2       4             6   8                0   2    4     6     8
                                         1e9                                                   1e9                                                  1e9                                   1e9
                        Skiing                                            Solaris                                              Venture
           0                                                                                           2.5K
         -5K                                     25K
                                                 20K                                                        2K
        -10K
                                                 15K                                                   1.5K
Score




        -15K
        -20K                                     10K                                                        1K
        -25K                                      5K                                                    500
        -30K                                          0                                                      0
               0   2   4      6   8                    0.0         0.5       1.0        1.5                      0    2       4      6          8
                        Frames           1e9                               Frames             1e10                             Frames               1e9

                                                              (a) Exploration phase without domain knowledge.
                                                                              Avg. Human              SOTA                Go-Explore
                                                               MontezumaRevenge                                                      Pitfall
                                               1.5M                                                         100K
                                              1.25M
                                                                                                             80K
                                                 1M
                                                                                                             60K
                                      Score




                                                                                                    Score




                                               750K
                                               500K                                                          40K
                                               250K                                                          20K
                                                  0                                                              0
                                                      0        2         4      6        8                       0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25
                                                                          Frames              1e9                              Frames        1e10

                                                               (b) Exploration phase with domain knowledge.

Extended Data Figure 4: Progress of robustification phase on Atari. Shown are the scores achieved by robustifying
agents across training time for the exploration phase (a) with representations informed by domain knowledge, and (b)
representations without domain knowledge. In particular, the rolling mean is shown of performance across the past 100
episodes when starting from the virtual demonstration (which corresponds to the domain’s traditional starting state).
Note that in (a) averaging is over 5 independent runs, while in (b) averaging is over 10 runs. Because the final perfor-
mance is obtained by testing the highest-performing network checkpoint for each run over 1,000 additional episodes
rather than directly extracted from the curves above, the performance reported in Figure 2b does not necessarily match
any particular point along these curves (Methods).




                                                                                                27
                                      Top Left                                    Top Right                                                         Top Left                           Top Right
                  100%                                         100%                                                        67.5
                                                                                                                             65                                         130
                  80%                                          80%
                                                                                                                           62.5


                                                                                                          Success Length
   Success Rate




                  60%                                          60%                                                                                                      120
                                                                                                                             60
                  40%                                          40%                                                         57.5                                         110
                  20%                                          20%                                                           55                                         100
                                                                                                                           52.5
                   0%                                           0%                                                                                                      90
                         0.0   0.5       1.0       1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5   2.0                                      1.0           1.5    2.0         0.5      1.0     1.5     2.0
                                                         1e7                                        1e7                                                           1e7                                  1e7
                                     Bottom Left                              Bottom Right                                                     Bottom Left                           Bottom Right
                  100%                                         100%                                                               70                                    170
                  80%                                          80%                                                                65                                    160
                                                                                                                 Success Length




                                                                                                                                                                        150
   Success Rate




                  60%                                          60%                                                                60
                                                                                                                                                                        140
                  40%                                          40%                                                                55                                    130
                  20%                                          20%                                                                                                      120
                                                                                                                                  50
                   0%                                           0%                                                                                                      110
                         0.0   0.5       1.0       1.5   2.0          0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5   2.0                                0.5         1.0      1.5   2.0         0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00
                                       Frames            1e7                       Frames           1e7                                              Frames       1e7                   Frames         1e7

                               (a) Runs with successful trajectories.                                                                  (b) Length of the shortest successful trajectory

Extended Data Figure 5: Progress of the exploration phase in the robotics environment. In (a), the exploration
phase quickly achieves 100% success rate for all shelves in the robotics environment. However, (b) shows that while
success is achieved quickly, it is useful to keep the exploration phase running longer to reduce the length of the
successful trajectories, thus making robustification easier.




                                                                                                      28
                                    mini-batch
                                        actor
                   new episode starts             cell reached

          select cell                go to cell            explore from cell

                        episode ends                             episode ends

                                        actor                                                   map encounterd
                   new episode starts             cell reached                                   states to cells

          select cell                go to cell            explore from cell                          update
                        episode ends                             episode ends
                                                                                                      archive

                                                                                                      update
                                                                                                      model
                                        actor
                   new episode starts             cell reached

          select cell                go to cell            explore from cell

                        episode ends                             episode ends


Extended Data Figure 6: Policy-based Go-Explore overview. With respect to their practical implementation, the main
difference between policy-based Go-Explore and Go-Explore without a policy is that in policy-based Go-Explore there
exist separate actors that each have an internal loop switching between the “select”, “go”, and “explore” steps, rather
than one outer loop in which the “select”, “go”, and “explore” steps are executed in synchronized batches. This
structure allows policy-based Go-Explore to be easily combined with popular RL algorithms like A3C17 , PPO18 or
DQN14 , which already divide data gathering over many actors.




                                                          29
                                                                                                   8K
                             12K      return                                                       7K      return
                                      random                                                               random


                                                                           Cells found by method
                             10K
     Cells found by method




                                      policy                                                       6K      policy
                              8K                                                                   5K
                              6K                                                                   4K
                              4K                                                                   3K
                                                                                                   2K
                              2K
                                                                                                   1K
                               0                                                                    00.0
                               0.0   0.2   0.4     0.6 0.8      1.0      1.2                               0.2      0.4    0.6    0.8      1.0
                                                 Frames               1e10                                            Frames            1e10
                                      (a) Montezuma’s Revenge                                                       (b) Pitfall

Extended Data Figure 7: Method by which cells are found. In both (a) Montezuma’s Revenge and (b) Pitfall,
sampling from the goal-conditioned policy results in the discovery of roughly four times more cells than when taking
random actions. At the start of training, there is effectively no difference between random actions and sampling from
the policy, supporting the intuition that sampling from the policy only becomes more efficient than random actions
after the policy has acquired the basic skills for moving towards the indicated goal. Lastly, the number of cells that
are discovered while returning is about twice that of the cells discovered when taking random actions after returning,
indicating that the frames spent while returning to a previously visited cell are not just overhead required for moving
towards the frontier of yet undiscovered states and training the policy network, but actually provide a substantial
contribution towards exploration as well.




                                                                           30
                                                               Robustification                 Policy-Based
                       Parameter                         Atari               Robotics              Atari
                   Discount factor (γ)                  0.999                  0.99                0.99
                 N-step return factor (λ)                0.95                  0.95                0.95
                      Nb. workers                          8                     8                   16
                 Nb. actors per worker                32 + 2 SIL            120 + 8 SIL         15 + 1 SIL
                     Nb. actors (N )                256 + 16 SIL           960 + 64 SIL        240 + 16 SIL
                  Steps per batch (T )                   128                    128                 128
                      PPO Clip ()                        0.1                   0.1                 0.1
                      PPO Epochs                           4                     4                    4
                   Value coef. (wV F )                    0.5                   0.5                 0.5
                   Ent. coef. (wEN T )                  10−5                   10−5                10−4
                                                           −7
                     L2 coef. (wL2 )                    10                     10−7                10−7
                    SIL coef. (wSIL )                     0.1                   0.1                 0.1
               SIL ent. coef. (wSIL EN T )              10−5                   10−5                   0
               SIL value coef. (wSIL V F )               0.01                   0.1                0.01
                                                              1                     1                   1
                   Cell selection weight           W = √                W = √                W =
                                                           Cseen + 1             Cseen + 1       0.5Csteps + 1
              x, y coordinates discretization       8 by 16 pixels                -           18 by 18 pixels
                       Allowed lag                        50                    10                    -
                     Extra frame coef                      7                     4                    -
                      Move threshold                      0.1                   0.1                   -
                    Nb. demonstrations              10 + 1 virtual              10                    -
                    SIL from start prob.                  0.3                     0                   -
                  Window size (frames)                   160                     40                   -
                                           (a) Robustification and policy-based parameters

                                                     Parameter                Value
                                                    Sticky actions             True
                                                     Length limit         400K frames*
                                                   End of episode         All lives lost†
                                                    Action repeat                4
                                                   Frame max pool            2 or 4‡
                                                    * OpenAI Gym default
                                                    † Except Montezuma’s Revenge with re-

                                                turn policy (Methods)
                                                     ‡ 4 for Gravitar and Venture


                                                   (b) Atari environment parameters

Extended Data Table 1: Hyperparameters. (a) Parameters above the dividing line are applicable to PPO in general,
while parameters below the line are specific to the backward algorithm. “Allowed lag” is the number of frames the
agent may lag the demonstration before being considered unsuccessful. When the agent matches the demonstration,
it runs for additional frames, controlled by “Extra frame coef” c: becX c (X ∼ U (0, 1)). Window size is the number
of starting points below the maximum starting point of the demonstration that the algorithm may start from. In the
equations specifying cell selection weight, Cseen is the number of exploration steps in which that cell is visited (i.e. the
Cseen count of a cell is increased by one when it is visited in the exploration step, even if the cell was visited multiple
times in that step). Csteps is the total number of steps the agent spend in the cell. The x, y discretization only refers to
experiments with domain knowledge and the top 50 pixels are ignored as the agent can never enter them. (b) For the
exploration phase, only “Max episode length”, “End of episode”, and “Action repeat” apply.




                                                                     31
                           Object
                                                                                    Object
                           door1
                                                                                   DoorLR
                            door
                                                                                   DoorUR
                     elbow flex link
                                                                                    Shelf
                   forearm roll link
                                                                                    Table
                       gripper link
                                                                                    door1
                    head camera link
                                                                                     door
                       head pan link
                                                                                  frameL1
                      head tilt link
                                                                                   frameL
                l gripper finger link
                                                                                  frameR1
                          latch1
                                                                                   frameR
                           latch
                                                                                gripper link
                            obj0
                                                                           l gripper finger link
                r gripper finger link
                                                                                   latch1
                  shoulder lift link
                                                                                    latch
                   shoulder pan link
                                                                                     obj0
                  upperarm roll link
                                                                           r gripper finger link
                     wrist flex link
                                                                                    world
                     wrist roll link
                                                                       (b) Collision and bounding box objects
               (a) Position and velocity objects

Extended Data Table 2: Robotics state representation. Position and velocities of the objects in (a) are included
in the state representation for robotics. Collisions between any two objects in (b) as well as whether each object is
currently inside the bounding boxes for the table and shelves are also included in the state representation. Objects are
given by their MuJoCo52 entity names in the source code for the environment. Door-related objects ending with a 1
correspond to the lower door while door-related objects not ending with anything correspond to the upper door. The
frame objects are the unmovable wooden blocks situated on either side of the movable part of the door. “L” and “R”
correspond to “left” and “right” whereas “L” and “U” correspond to “lower” and “upper”. The difference between
“door” and “DoorUR” as well as “door1” and “DoorLR” is that in each case the latter object corresponds to the entire
door structure, including the frames, while the former corresponds only to the movable part of the door. A link to the
original source code for the MuJoCo description files defining these entities is given in “Acknowledgements”, and a
link to the Go-Explore codebase containing our modified version is provided in Methods section “Code availability”.




                                                          32
Game               Expl. Phase    Robust. Phase     SOTA     Avg. Human
Alien                 959,312                       11,358          7,128
Amidar                  19,083                       3,092          1,720
Assault                 30,773                      13,759            742
Asterix               999,500                      274,491          8,503
Asteroids             112,952                      159,426         47,389
Atlantis              286,460                      937,558         29,028
BankHeist                 3,668                      1,563            753
BattleZone            998,800                       45,610         37,188
BeamRider             371,723                       24,031         16,927
Berzerk               131,417           197,376      1,383          2,630
Bowling                     247             260         69            161
Boxing                       91                         99             12
Breakout                    774                        637             31
Centipede             613,815          1,422,628    10,166         12,017
ChopperCommand        996,220                       19,256          7,388
CrazyClimber          235,600                      160,161         35,829
DemonAttack           239,895                      133,030          1,971
DoubleDunk                   24                         23            -16
Enduro                    1,031                      2,338            861
FishingDerby                 67                         49            -39
Freeway                      34              34         34             30
Frostbite             999,990                       10,003          4,335
Gopher                134,244                       26,123          2,413
Gravitar                13,385            7,588      3,906          3,351
Hero                    37,783                      50,142         30,826
IceHockey                    33                         14              1
Jamesbond             200,810                        4,303            303
Kangaroo                24,300                      13,982          3,035
Krull                   63,149                       9,971          2,666
KungFuMaster            24,320                      44,920         22,736
MontezumaRevenge        24,758           43,791     11,618          4,753
MsPacman              456,123                        9,901          6,952
NameThisGame          212,824                       18,084          8,049
Phoenix                 19,200                     148,840          7,243
Pitfall                   7,875           6,954          0          6,464
Pong                         21                         21             15
PrivateEye              69,976           95,756     26,364         69,571
Qbert                 999,975                       26,172         13,455
Riverraid               35,588                      24,116         17,118
RoadRunner            999,900                       67,962          7,845
Robotank                    143                         70             12
Seaquest              539,456                       64,985         42,055
Skiing                   -4,185          -3,660    -10,386         -4,337
Solaris                 20,306           19,671      3,282         12,327
SpaceInvaders           93,147                      24,183          1,669
StarGunner            609,580                      265,480         10,250
Tennis                       24                         23             -8
TimePilot             183,620                       32,813          5,229
Tutankham                   528                        288            168
UpNDown               553,718                      193,520         11,693
Venture                   3,074           2,281      1,916          1,188
VideoPinball          999,999                      656,572         17,668
WizardOfWor           199,900                       10,980          4,757
YarsRevenge           999,998                       93,680         54,577
Zaxxon                  18,340                      25,603          9,173

            Extended Data Table 3: Full scores on Atari.


                                  33
Supplementary Information

Detachment and derailment in reinforcement learning Environment exploration has long been a central topic in
the field of reinforcement learning1,39,47,48,54 . Despite the extensive research on exploration in reinforcement learning,
we hypothesise that many previous algorithms have been affected by two major issues which we call detachment and
derailment.

   We define detachment as losing track of interesting areas to explore from. Here, “interesting areas to explore
from” refers to states for which we have evidence (e.g. a low number of visits) that they could lead to the discovery of
new areas of the environment. “Losing track” means that the algorithm stops trying to visit those areas prematurely,
despite the fact that they are not thoroughly explored yet. For reinforcement learning algorithms that only optimise the
expected return, detachment is almost guaranteed, as these algorithms do not attempt to promote exploration explicitly.
Unless external rewards are aligned with interesting areas to explore from, such algorithms will stop visiting under-
explored areas in favour of areas with a high return. However, algorithms that reward the agent for exploring new states
can still suffer from detachment. In intrinsic-motivation (IM) algorithms, for example, detachment can happen because
the intrinsic reward is lowered each time a state is visited, so that, eventually, they in effect provide no incentive for
an agent to return to them. This issue can be especially prominent when there are multiple frontiers, as the agent may
now, due to stochastic exploration, stop visiting one of those frontiers long enough to forget how to return to it (Fig. 1).
When this happens, the agent has to effectively relearn how to reach the frontier from scratch, but this time there is
no intrinsic reward anymore to guide the agent. If intrinsic rewards were required to find the frontier in the first place,
meaning that an algorithm without intrinsic rewards would fail to find this frontier, the IM algorithm will similarly fail
to rediscover the frontier as well, meaning it has detached from the frontier. One might think that allowing intrinsic
motivation to regrow after a time would solve the issue, but in that case the same dynamic can just play out over and
over again endlessly.

   We define derailment as when the exploratory mechanisms of the algorithm prevent it from returning to previously
visited states. Returning to previously visited states is important because many RL environments, and especially hard-
exploration environments, contain a large number of states that are far way from a starting state and can not be easily
reached from such a starting state through random actions, even when exploring for hundreds of billions of frames. To
discover these states, many algorithms rely on the policy learning to take actions that lead to states that are increasingly
further away, either because the policy discovered external rewards leading towards these far away states, or because
the algorithm provides intrinsic rewards that lead the policy towards infrequently visited states. However, as the policy
needs to take an increasingly large number of correct actions to reach unexplored areas of the environment, it becomes
increasingly likely that a state-agnostic exploration mechanism (i.e. any exploration mechanism that explores the same
amount in all states, regardless of whether the agent is in a novel or a well-explored area), such as -greedy exploration,
will cause the policy to take one or more exploratory actions that prevent it from reaching the distant state it sought


                                                            34
Supplementary Information Figure 1: Example of detachment with intrinsic reward. Green areas indicate intrinsic
reward, white indicates areas where no intrinsic reward remains, and purple areas indicate where the algorithm is
currently exploring.


to return to, thus stifling exploration. Two common strategies to prevent derailment are to (1) set the exploration
probability (e.g.  in -greedy exploration) to be small or (2) to start with a high exploration probability, but reduce
it over training iterations16 . Working with a fixed, low exploration probability throughout training reduces the effect
derailment throughout training, but it also means that very little exploration will happen once a new state is reached.
Annealing exploration over training iterations will initially lead to a lot of exploration at the cost of heavy derailment.
Unfortunately, if there exists a far away state that requires precise actions to reach, that state will not be reached until
the exploration probability has been reduced sufficiently to avoid derailment. This low exploration probability means
that, once the agent is finally able reliably reach this far away state, very little exploration will be performed after
reaching it.

   The solution we propose to avoid derailment is to have an algorithm exhibit separate exploration probabilities
depending on whether it is in a well-known area of the environment, meaning the probability of exploratory actions
should be low, or in an unknown area of the environment, meaning the probabilities of exploratory actions should be
high. While doing so is not a feature of state-agnostic exploratory mechanisms like -greedy exploration, one could
hope that it is a property of algorithms that explore by sampling from a stochastic policy, because stochastic policies
could learn to be low entropy in familiar states (i.e. they are certain about the correct action) while remaining high
entropy in new states (i.e. where they should be uncertain about the correct action). However, deep learning struggles


                                                            35
to remain well-calibrated when provided out-of-distribution input data. In image classification, for example, when
networks classify images far out of distribution, it would be helpful if these networks returned a uniform distribution
of probability across classes to properly indicate uncertainty, but networks instead are often surprisingly overconfi-
dent56,57 . In the context of RL, this result means that we can expect trained policies to be highly confident in their
actions (i.e. low entropy), even in areas that they have never observed before, thus resulting in a lack of exploration.
To remedy this issue, stochastic-policy RL algorithms generally add an entropy bonus to the loss function, encourag-
ing the policy to assign more equal probability to all actions. However, because this entropy bonus applies equally
throughout the trajectory of a policy, it is difficult to tune the entropy bonus in a way that guarantees effective explo-
ration without sacrificing the network’s ability to return; if the entropy bonus is too high, the policy will frequently
take exploratory actions that prevent it from returning, thus causing derailment, but if the entropy bonus is too small,
the policy will not explore sufficiently when a new area is reached.

Derailment in robotics As shown in the main text of this paper, a count-based intrinsic motivation control completely
fails to discover any rewards in the robotics environment even though it is given the same domain knowledge state
representation as Go-Explore’s exploration phase and when given a comparable budget of frames to Go-Explore’s
exploration and robustification phases combined. Evidence from the experiments suggests that this failure is primarily
due to the problem of derailment, specifically to the difficulty that the IM control has of learning to reliably grasp the
object.

   Grasping is widely considered an extremely difficult task to learn in robotics34,35 . The overwhelming majority of
undiscovered cells are those require grasping the object and lifting it to reach. The claim that the failure to explore
the environment is due to derailment when grasping the object necessitates that grasping is discovered, but cannot be
reliably reproduced by the policy due to its excessive exploratory mechanisms. We separate the discovery of grasping
into three steps: touching the object with one of the two grippers (the “touch” step), touching that surrounds the object
with both grippers (the “grasp” step), and finally lifting the object (the “lift” step). An analysis of the cells and counts
discovered by 20 control runs (5 per target shelf) shows that all runs discover the “touch” and “grasp” step, but in 18
(90%) of these runs, the count associated with the “grasp” step is at least 10x smaller than that associated with the
“touch” step, indicating difficulty (and thus possible derailment) in learning to go from the “touch” step to the “grasp”
step. In the 2 (10%) remaining runs, the “grasp” step count is closer to the “touch” step count, but, in one case, lifting
is never discovered, and in the other, lifting is discovered, but the count for the “lift” step is again over 10x smaller
than that of the “grasp” step, indicating possible derailment in between those two steps. It is thus apparent that the
IM control has difficulty returning to the grasping stepping stones that it discovers, in spite of these cells often having
amongst the lowest counts of any cell discovered, and thus the highest intrinsic rewards, thereby providing evidence
of derailment.




                                                            36
Policy-based Go-Explore and Stochastic Environments Restoring simulator state is a highly efficient method for
returning to previously visited states, as it both removes the need to replay the trajectory towards a previously visited
state as well as the need to train a policy capable of doing so reliably. That said, doing so also has the potential
drawback that some of the trajectories found by restoring simulator state can be hard to robustify if that trajectory is
not representative of realistic policies that can succeed in the stochastic testing environment. For example, imagine a
robot with the goal of crossing a busy highway. The cars on the highway are stochastic, meaning that their position,
speed, and reactions will differ in every episode, but the highway is always busy. As such, we assume that there is
no safe way to reliably cross the busy highway directly. The highway has an overpass that allows the robot to easily
and reliably cross the highway safely, but it is located some distance away from the robot, meaning that it is not the
shortest method to cross the highway. However, when restoring simulator state, it is likely that Go-Explore will find
a way directly across the highway in this particular scenario, because there probably exists some static sequence of
lucky actions that brings the agent from one cell on the highway to the next cell, and once the next cell is reached,
that progress is saved in the form of the simulator state. Once the opposite side of the highway is reached, this shorter
trajectory will overwrite any longer trajectories that go over the overpass, and the final trajectory returned will go
directly over the highway. Training a policy that can reliably follow this trajectory may be impossible because the
inherent stochasticity of the cars on the highway (i.e. the inherent stochasticity of the environment) can make it such
that a sufficiently reliable policy simply does not exist. That is, each new random busy highway situation requires its
own lucky set of actions that may not derive in any systematic way from the agent’s observations.

   Policy-based Go-Explore can alleviate this situations in two ways. First, because its progress along the highway
is not saved and because each trial is in a stochastic environment, policy-based Go-Explore must attempt to return
manually to each cell across the highway in different conditions. If there does not exist a reliable policy that can do so,
it is unlikely that policy-based Go-Explore will ever cross the highway this way. As a result, policy-based Go-Explore
is much more likely to learn a policy that reliably navigates the overpass instead.

   Second, because policy-based Go-Explore needs to return to cells in the presence of stochasticity, it can keep track
of the success rate towards each cell in the archive. As such, even if policy-based Go-Explore is sometimes able to
cross the highway, it is possible to not overwrite cells on the other side of the highway until the policy has learned
to return to those cells reliably. Doing so prevents the shorter, but unreliable trajectories from overwriting the longer
but more reliable trajectories that take the safe overpass. A similar mechanic could be implemented to deal with
stochasticity in rewards, as policy-based Go-Explore makes it possible to track the average reward when attempting
to reach a particular state. Because it was not necessary to implement such mechanics for the games of Montezuma’s
Revenge and Pitfall, studying the effectiveness and exact implementation details of such a mechanic is a topic for
future research.

   Last, it may be possible to resolve these issues even when Go-Explore is allowed to restore simulator state. For



                                                            37
                                 120K                                                                          25K




                                                                                    Mean Reward to Best Cell
      Mean Reward to Best Cell   100K                                                                          20K
                                 80K
                                                                                                               15K
                                 60K
                                                                                                               10K
                                 40K                                                                                         DTSIL
                                                DTSIL
                                                                                                               5K
                                 20K
                                    0                                                                            0
                                    0.0   0.2    0.4      0.6  0.8   1.0      1.2                                0.0   0.2    0.4      0.6   0.8      1.0
                                                        Frames             1e10                                                  Frames            1e10
                                          (a) Montezuma’s Revenge                                                            (b) Pitfall

Supplementary Information Figure 2: Policy-based Go-Explore test performance over time compared against
final performance of DTSIL. The final performance of DTSIL is indicated by the black dot and is positioned at 3.2
billion frames, the number of frames for which the DTSIL agent was trained. (a) On Montezuma’s Revenge policy-
based Go-Explore outperforms DTSIL after 3.2 billion frames by roughly 18,000 points. (b) On Pitfall policy-based
Go-Explore outperforms DTSIL after 3.2 billion frames by roughly 6,000 points.


example, it is possible to run the Go-Explore exploration phase many times with different random seeds, thus making
it possible to estimate which trajectories are and which trajectories are not reliable. Recognising that trajectories
with only slight differences in the states visited still represent effectively the same solution could be handled by the
aggregation that occurs in the cell representation, meaning that solutions that visit the same cells in order (instead of
the same states in order) could be considered the same. It thus seems possible to produce a version of Go-Explore that
is able to estimate the reliability of different trajectories while still gaining the advantages of restoring simulator state.
Identifying the exact form of that algorithm and experimentally validating it is a fruitful area of future research.

Policy-based Go-Explore vs. DTSIL After a pre-print paper describing Go-Explore58 (but not policy-based Go-
Explore) was published, and after our work on policy-based Go-Explore was long underway, another research team
independently developed and published the Diverse Trajectory-conditioned Self-Imitation Learning algorithm (DT-
SIL)39 , which is similar to policy-based Go-Explore in many ways, as detailed below. Policy-based Go-Explore out-
performs DTSIL on both Montezuma’s Revenge and Pitfall after 3.2 billion frames, despite the fact that policy-based
Go-Explore was tested on a harder problem, i.e. with sticky actions (Fig. 2). In addition, the score of policy-based
Go-Explore keeps increasing, eventually achieving a score of 97,728 on Montezuma’s Revenge and 20,093 on Pitfall
after 12 billion and 10 billion frames, respectively. It is possible that the performance of DTSIL would also improve
with additional frames, but those results were not reported.

   DTSIL is similar to policy-based Go-Explore in that it follows the methodology described in the Go-Explore
pre-print in the following ways: (1) Like the original Go-Explore, DTSIL explicitly keeps track of an archive of many
different states and trajectories to those states, (2) DTSIL first moves the agent to one of these states before performing


                                                                                38
random exploration, (3) DTSIL determines whether to add a state to the archive with the help of a domain-knowledge
based state embedding, where similar embeddings are grouped into a single cluster (i.e. a cell representation), and (4)
DTSIL selects trajectories to follow (i.e. states to return to) by selecting them probabilistically based on the number of
times particular clusters have been visited, though DTSIL did not consider any domain knowledge specific information
for the purpose of this selection procedure.

   Similar to policy-based Go-Explore, and as was recommended as a profitable future direction in our pre-print58 ,
DTSIL is a method that returns to previously visited cells with the help of a goal-conditioned policy (referred to as a
trajectory-conditioned policy in the DTSIL paper because the policy is provided with a sequence of the next few goals,
as explained below). Also similar to policy-based Go-Explore, DTSIL follows a trajectory of intermediate sub-goals
towards a particular goal cell, rather than conditioning the policy directly on the state to return to, and DTSIL includes
self-imitation learning to make training the policy more sample efficient. While working on policy-based Go-Explore,
we independently invented the technique of following a trajectory of sub-goals and harnessing self-imitation learning.

   One major difference between policy-based Go-Explore and DTSIL is that, when following a trajectory, DTSIL
aims to provide the entire trajectory as input to the policy, rather than just the next cell in the trajectory. As a result, the
DTSIL network architecture requires some method to deal with variable length trajectories (resolved with an attention
layer), while the policy-based Go-Explore architecture only requires the next (sub) goal cell as an input. Note that,
in the DTSIL paper, most trajectories that are followed were found to be too long to provide to the network in their
entirety, meaning the trajectory is instead provided to the network in small chunks, resulting in a dynamic that is
similar to providing only the next goal.

   Another major difference is that policy-based Go-Explore also samples from the policy while exploring, rather
than just relying on random actions. As mentioned before (Extended Data Fig. 7), sampling from the policy results
in the discovery of many more cells, potentially explaining the large performance advantage Go-Explore exhibits vs.
DTSIL.

   A third major difference is the way in which DTSIL and policy-based Go-Explore transition from exploration to
exploitation. DTSIL transitions from exploration to exploitation by either slowly annealing across training iterations
from selecting promising cells for exploration to selecting the highest scoring cells, or by making such a transition
abruptly once a particular score threshold is reached. Policy-based Go-Explore, on the other hand, only focuses on
exploration during training. Interestingly, despite being asked to return to all cells, rather than spending a good number
of training iterations on just the highest performing ones (which is what DTSIL does), we found that policy-based Go-
Explore tends to be able to reliably return to the highest scoring cell in the archive at test time.

   A fourth major difference is our introduction of increasing entropy when the agent takes too long to reach the
next cell (see Methods). This entropy increases the exploration performed by policy-based Go-Explore only when



                                                              39
necessary, thus largely avoiding the problem of derailment. Because derailment can severely lower performance, we
expect that this innovation contributes substantially to the performance advantage of our implementation of policy-
based Go-Explore relative to DTSIL.

    A last major difference is with respect to the experiments that were performed. DTSIL was tested on Montezuma’s
Revenge and Pitfall without sticky actions. In preliminary experiments with policy-based Go-Explore, we found that
removing sticky actions greatly simplified the problem, and testing policy-based Go-Explore without sticky actions
would have increased its performance. As a result, and as explained in methods, we did not include DTSIL in our
comparison with the state of the art, but we did provide a comparison at the beginning of this section.

    Besides these major differences, there are many smaller differences between the two algorithms, including differ-
ences in cell selection probabilities, SIL equations, reward clipping, maximum episode length, and hyperparameters.
For a full overview of these differences, we recommend comparing the methods explained in this paper directly with
the methods described in the DTSIL paper39 .

    Because the algorithm described in the DTSIL paper is similar to policy-based Go-Explore, in preliminary experi-
ments, we tested whether some of the hyperparameters described in the DTSIL paper would improve the performance
of policy-based Go-Explore. In these preliminary experiments, we found that the grid size of their cell representation
(determining the granularity for the x and y coordinates of the agent) of 9x9‡ and their learning rate of 2.5 · 10−4 did
indeed perform better than the hyperparameters we were testing at that time, and we adopted these hyperparameters
from the DTSIL paper instead.

    The training performance of DTSIL on Montezuma’s Revenge and Pitfall was reported by Guo et al. (2019)39 for
experiments that ran for 3.2 billion frames. However, the performance-over-time graph presented in the DTSIL paper
is not directly comparable with the performance-over-time graph shown in this paper because they represent results
for different selection strategies. For policy-based Go-Explore, we always report the average score achieved when
returning to the highest scoring cell in the archive (obtained after training is completed by loading stored checkpoints
and testing the policy 100 times). In contrast, the DTSIL graph shows a rolling average score during training, which
means that its average includes returning to low-scoring cells as the algorithm attempts to explore the environment.
That said, the final performance of DTSIL after 3.2 billion frames is measured over only the highest scoring trajecto-
ries, and can thus be reasonably compared with the testing performance of policy-based Go-Explore after that many
frames. For Montezuma’s Revenge, we compare policy-based Go-Explore against the results that were reported in the
supplementary information of the DTSIL paper for a version of DTSIL that implemented the same cell representation
as the one used in the policy-based Go-Explore experiments (note, the Montezuma’s Revenge results reported in the
main DTSIL paper were lower). For Pitfall, we compare against the only reported results, which were obtained with
     ‡ Note that, while an Atari frame is 160x210 pixels, the top 50 rows of pixels are unreachable in our test games and were ignored, meaning that

a discretization of 18x18 pixels does result in a 9x9 grid.




                                                                        40
a slightly different cell representation than the one used by policy-based Go-Explore. Specifically, the DTSIL cell
representation includes the cumulative positive reward achieved; the representations are otherwise the same.

No-ops and sticky actions The Atari benchmark has been accepted as a common RL benchmark because of the large
variety of independent environments it provides26 . One downside of the games available in this benchmark is that they
are inherently deterministic, making it possible to achieve high scores by simply memorizing state-action mappings or
a fixed sequence of actions, rather than learning a policy able to generalize to the much larger number of states that are
available in each game. As the community is interested in learning general policies rather than brittle solutions, many
have suggested approaches to improve the benchmark, usually by adding some form of stochasticity to the game3 .

   One of the first of these approaches was to start each game with a random number (up to 30) of no-op (i.e. do
nothing) actions14 . Executing a random number of no-ops causes the game to start in a slightly different state each
episode, as many game entities like enemies and items move in response to time. While no-ops add some stochasticity
at the start of an episode, the game dynamics themselves are still deterministic, allowing for frame-perfect strategies
that would be impossible for a human player to reproduce reliably. In addition, with only 30 different possible starting
states, memorization is more difficult, but still possible.

   Because of the downsides of no-ops, an alternative approach called sticky actions was recommended by the com-
munity3 . Sticky actions mean that, at any time-step greater than 0, there exists a 25% chance that the current action
of the agent is ignored, and the previous action is executed instead. In a way, sticky actions simulate the fact that it is
difficult for a human player to provide the desired input at the exact right frame; often a button is pressed a little bit too
early, a little bit too late, or held down for a little too long. Given that Atari games have been designed for human play,
this means that human competitive scores should be achievable despite the stochasticity introduced by sticky actions.

   While sticky actions have been recommended by the community, no-ops are still widely employed in many recent
papers13,30 . As it is possible that no-ops add some challenges not encountered with just sticky actions, we ensure that
Go-Explore is evaluated under conditions that are at least as difficult as those presented in recent papers by evaluating
Go-Explore with both sticky actions and no-ops. All Go-Explore scores in this paper come from evaluations with both
of these forms of stochasticity combined.

PPO and SIL Both the robustification “backward” algorithm and the implementation of policy-based Go-Explore
are based on the actor-critic-style PPO algorithm from Schulman et al. (2017)18 , wherein N parallel actors collect
data in mini-batches of T timesteps, and policy updates are performed after each batch. In all PPO-based algorithms
presented here, the loss of the policy and value function (both parameterized by θ) is defined as


                   L(θ) = LP G (θ) + wV F LV F (θ) + wEN T LEN T (θ) + wL2 LL2 + wSIL LSIL (θ)                            (7)




                                                              41
LP G (θ) is the policy gradient loss with PPO clipping, defined as


                         LP G (θ) = Es,a∼πθ [max(−At rtπ (θ), −At clip(rtπ (θ), 1 − , 1 + ))]                       (8)

                                                                πθ (at |st )
                                                   rtπ (θ) =                                                          (9)
                                                               πθold (at |st )

where s izs a state, a is an action sampled from the policy πθ , rt is the reward obtained at time-step t, and  is
a hyperparameter limiting how much the policy can be changed at each epoch. At is a truncated version of the
generalised advantage estimation:


                                      Ât = δt + (γλ)δt+1 + ... + (γλ)T −t+1 δT −1                                   (10)


                                              δt = rt + γVθ (st+1 ) − Vθ (st )                                       (11)

where γ is the discount factor, λ interpolates between a 1-step return and a T -step return, Vθ is the value function
parameterised by θ, and st and rt are the state and reward at time step t, respectively. Similar to the policy gradient
loss, the value function loss LV F (θ) implemented here also includes PPO-based clipping, and is defined as


                 LV F (θ) = Es,a∼πθ [max((Vθ (st ) − R̂t )2 , (clip(Vθ (st ) − Vθold (st ), −, ) − Ât )2 )]       (12)


                                                  R̂t = Vθold (st , gt ) + Ât                                       (13)

The algorithms further include entropy regularization59 LEN T (θ) and an L2 regularization penalty LL2 (θ).

   Finally, both the robustification algorithm and policy-based Go-Explore include a self-imitation learning (SIL)
loss38 , LSIL (θ), which is calculated over previously collected data D. While the source of D differs between the
robustification algorithm and policy-based Go-Explore (see their sub-sections for details), in both cases D comes
from previously collected trajectories τ and consists of tuples (s, a, R), where s is a state encountered in one of these
rollouts, a is the action that was taken in that state, and R is the discounted reward that was collected from that state.
With SIL, a small number (NSIL ) of PPO’s actors are assigned to be SIL actors. Each of these SIL actors, instead of
taking actions in the environment, replays one of these trajectories τ , and at each iteration the data collected by these
SIL actors, forms the data set D. The LSIL (θ) loss is then calculated as


                    LSIL (θ) = LSIL P G (θ) + wSIL V F LSIL V F (θ) + wSIL EN T LSIL EN T (θ)                        (14)


                            LSIL P G (θ) = Es,a,R∈D [−logπθ (a|s) · max(0, R − Vθold (s))]                           (15)
                                                                                
                                                           1
                                 LSIL V F (θ) = Es,a,r∈D     max(0, R − Vθ (s))2                                     (16)
                                                           2


                                                               42
Here, LSIL EN T (θ) is the entropy regularization term59 calculated by evaluating the current policy over D.

   All architectures that feature recurrent units are updated with a variant of the truncated back-propagation-through-
time algorithm called BPTT(h; h0 )60 , which is suitable when data is gathered in mini-batches. In BPTT(h; h0 ), the
network is updated every h0 timesteps (here h0 = T , the number of timesteps in the mini-batch), but it is unfolded
for h ≥ h0 timesteps (here h = 1.5T ), meaning that gradients can flow beyond the boundaries of the mini-batch. To
facilitate BPTT(h; h0 ), the first mini-batch of each run consists of 1.5T timesteps.

The backward algorithm The “backward algorithm”29 operates by placing the agent close to the end of the trajectory
and running PPO until the performance of the agent matches or exceeds that of the demonstration. Once that is
achieved, the agent’s starting point is moved closer to the trajectory’s beginning and the process is repeated. The
algorithm thus learns the demonstration in a backward order.

   The original version of the backward algorithm relied on a single demonstration due to the assumption that ob-
taining human demonstrations was expensive. In our case, however, obtaining multiple demonstrations is easy and
cheap by simply re-running the exploration phase, which is why we modified the algorithm to utilise multiple demon-
strations: at the start of each episode, a demonstration is chosen at random to provide the starting point for the agent.
For Atari, 10 demonstrations from different runs of the exploration phase were used for each robustification. In Atari,
the demonstration was extracted by finding all trajectories that reached an end-of-episode state (to prevent selection of
length 0 trajectories in games with exclusively negative rewards, see Methods “Evaluation”), and extracting the short-
est one among those with the highest score. For robotics, because it was possible to extract diverse demonstrations
from a single run of the exploration phase (this was not possible in Atari because high-scoring trajectories within a
given Atari run tended to share most of their actions), 10 demonstrations from the same runs were used for robustifi-
cation. In robotics, the first demonstration corresponds to the shortest successful trajectory (i.e. the shortest trajectory
that puts the object in the shelf), while each subsequent demonstration corresponds to the successful trajectory with
the highest mean difference from all previously selected trajectories, where the difference between two trajectories
              PL
                     I(τia 6=τib )
is given by    i=1
                      L              (τ a and τ b are the list of actions being compared, L = min(|τ a |, |τ b |), I is the indicator
function). Because actions are continuous, meaning that it is exceedingly unlikely for two independently sampled
actions to be the same, τia = τib only for parts where the trajectories are identical because they were branched from
the same intermediate trajectory. As such, this metric effectively measures to what degree the two trajectories have a
shared history, and prefers trajectories that share as little history as possible. In both cases, SIL was also performed
on the set of demonstrations provided to the backward algorithm (see “PPO and SIL” section). Each robustification
run used demonstrations from different, non-overlapping exploration phase runs (10 exploration runs for Atari, 1 for
robotics).

   On Atari, the score that can be obtained by starting the algorithm from the start of the environment is tracked
throughout the run by adding a virtual demonstration of length 0, i.e. traditional training that executes the current policy


                                                                     43
from the domain’s traditional starting state. This addition makes it possible to occasionally obtain superhuman policies
even when the backward algorithm has not yet reached the starting point of any of the non-virtual demonstrations it
was provided. During training, the time limit of an episode is the remaining length of the demonstration (which is
generally much shorter than the environment time limit, especially at the beginning of training since we start at the
end of demonstrations and move backwards) plus a few extra frames (Extended Data Table 1a). When the virtual
demonstration is selected, however, the time limit is that of the underlying environment (Extended Data Table 1b).
As a result, training episodes in which the virtual demonstration was selected often require many more frames to
complete than those corresponding to an exploration phase demonstration. To balance the number of frames allocated
to the virtual demonstration, the average number of steps in an episode corresponding to the virtual demonstration
(lv ) is tracked as well as the average number of steps corresponding to starting from any other demonstration (ld ), and
                                                                     1 ld
the selection probability of the virtual demonstration is then       11 lv ,   where 11 is the total number of demonstrations
(10 from the exploration phase runs and 1 virtual demonstration). In cases where the virtual demonstration was not
stochastically chosen, one of the exploration phase demonstrations was chosen uniformly at random.

   A key difficulty in implementing an RL algorithm that can perform well across all Atari games with identical
hyperparameters is the significant variations in reward scales within the Atari benchmarks, with some games having
an average reward of 1 and others with average rewards of over 1,000. Traditionally, this challenge has been addressed
with reward clipping, in which all rewards are clipped to either -1 or +1, but such an approach is problematic in
games (e.g. Pitfall and Skiing) in which the scale of rewards within the game is relevant because it tells the agent
the relative importance of different rewarded (or punished) actions. In this work, we take advantage of the fact that
the deterministic exploration phase is unaffected by reward scale and can provide us with a sense of the scale of
scores achievable in each game. We are thus able to use reward scaling in the robustification phase: at the start of the
robustification phase, the rewards of the demonstrations are used to produce a reward multiplier that will result every
game having approximately the same value function scale. This reward multiplier is given by

                                                                C
                                                       m=                                                                (17)
                                                                µV

where C is a constant representing the target average absolute value of the value function when following the demon-
stration (in all our experiments, C = 10), and µV is defined as

                                                                  Td
                                                                D X
                                                       1        X
                                            µV = PD                        |Vd (t)|                                      (18)
                                                     d=1   Td   d=1 t=1


where D is the number of demonstrations, Td is the number of steps in each demonstration, and Vd (t) is the sum of
discounted rewards in demonstration d starting from step t.




                                                           44
Go-Explore vs. Agent57 The creation of the Atari benchmark started the search for reinforcement learning al-
gorithms capable of achieving super-human performance on all games in this benchmark26 . For a majority of these
games, super-human performance was reached quickly through early deep reinforcement learning techniques now con-
sidered standard14 , but for a small set of games super-human performance remained out of reach. The work presented
in this paper achieved this historic feat concurrently with an algorithm called Agent5713 . Go-Explore and Agent57
accomplish this milestone via very different methods, offering the scientific community a diversity of promising tools
to use and build upon going forward.

   Agent57 is built upon the Never Give Up (NGU) algorithm30 . NGU was able to achieve superhuman performance
on the majority of the Atari games by combining within-episode and across-episode intrinsic motivation, tracking
many Q-functions that each maintain a different trade-off between intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, and implementing
efficient parallelization of data collection. Agent57 elevated the performance of NGU to superhuman on all games by
dynamically learning which of its many Q-functions provides the highest cumulative reward, stabilizing the learning
of those Q-functions, and by running the algorithm for an impressive 100 billion frames. So, while Agent57 achieved
the milestone of superhuman performance on the last few remaining games at the same time as Go-Explore, its method
is vastly different from Go-Explore.

   With respect to results, it is first of all important to reiterate that Go-Explore was evaluated in an environment with
sticky actions (i.e. following community standards, see SI “No-ops and sticky actions”) while Agent57 was evaluated
in an environment without sticky actions. Sticky actions make the games substantially harder to play well, which is
why Agent57 was not considered for direct comparison with Go-Explore in the main paper (see Methods “State of the
art on Atari”).

   Despite the fact that Go-Explore solutions were evaluated under more difficult conditions, Go-Explore still out-
performs Agent57 on 7 out of the 11 games that we tested (Table 1). It is also worth noting that the Go-Explore
results reported here were obtained after a total of 30 billion (or 40 billion for Solaris) frames of training data, while
Agent57 was trained for 100 billion frames. While Go-Explore does “skip” frames by reloading simulator state, we
argue that these frames would also be skipped in almost any scenario where Go-Explore is practically applied, as it
should be possible to save and restore the state of a modern simulator. That said, the relative sample efficiency of
policy-based Go-Explore (e.g. 97,728 points on Montezuma’s Revenge after 12 billion frames) suggests that policy-
based Go-Explore could be more sample efficient than Agent57 even if states can not be restored, though the fact that
policy-based Go-Explore was only tested with domain knowledge makes it impossible to provide a fair comparison at
this time.

ALE issues While the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE)26 , which is the underlying backend of OpenAI Gym, is
the the standard way to interface with Atari games in RL, the library comes with a couple issues that needed to be
addressed in our work.


                                                           45
                                        Game                  Go-Explore    Agent57
                                        Berzerk                  197,376     61,508
                                        Bowling                      260        251
                                        Centipede              1,422,628    412,848
                                        Freeway                       34         33
                                        Gravitar                   7,588     19,214
                                        MontezumaRevenge          43,791      9,352
                                        Pitfall                    6,954     18,756
                                        PrivateEye                95,756     79,717
                                        Skiing                    -3,660     -4,203
                                        Solaris                   19,671     44,200
                                        Venture                    2,281      2,628

Supplementary Information Table 1: Go-Explore outperforms Agent57 on 7 out of the 11 games that we tested.
Here we show the results of the Go-Explore variant where the exploration phase was performed without domain
knowledge and with restoration of simulator state. The Go-Explore results were obtained by re-evaluating the final
agent 1,000 times on the environment with sticky actions and no-ops.


      First, the score on Montezuma’s Revenge rolls over (i.e. is subject to numerical overflow) when it exceeds 1 million,
which is incorrectly interpreted by the ALE as a negative reward of -1 million. We patched the environment to remove
this bug and thereby make it possible for algorithms to learn to produce scores higher than 1 million. This enabled us
to learn that Go-Explore can substantially outperform the human world record of 1.2 million33 . No previous work had
achieved scores anywhere near high enough to trigger this particular bug on Montezuma’s Revenge.

      Second, the implementation of Montezuma’s Revenge in the ALE library includes a bug that prevents the agent
from progressing to the next level when the agent is on its last life, which is clearly unintended behaviour that does
not occur in the original game. Because there are no penalties for losing a life, policy-based Go-Explore learns to
sacrifice lives in order to bypass hazards or to return to the entrance of a room more quickly. As a result, policy-based
Go-Explore frequently reaches the treasure room without any lives remaining, preventing further progress. As such,
for policy-based Go-Explore only, we terminate the episode on first death, which avoids this bug without simplifying
the game.

Infrastructure In terms of infrastructure, each exploration phase run was performed on a single worker machine
equipped with 44 CPUs and 96GB of RAM, though memory usage is substantially lower for most games. Each
robustification run was parallelized across 8 worker machines each equipped with 11 CPUs, 24GB of RAM, and 1
GPU. Policy-based Go-Explore was parallelized across 16 worker machines each equipped with 11 CPUs, 10GB of
RAM, and 1 GPU.


References

56.     Nguyen, A., Yosinski, J. & Clune, J. Deep neural networks are easily fooled: High confidence predictions for un-
        recognizable images in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (2015),
        427–436.


                                                             46
57.   Szegedy, C. et al. Intriguing properties of neural networks. ArXiv e-prints abs/1312.6199 (2013).

58.   Ecoffet, A., Huizinga, J., Lehman, J., Stanley, K. O. & Clune, J. Go-explore: a new approach for hard-exploration
      problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.10995 (2019).

59.   O’Donoghue, B., Munos, R., Kavukcuoglu, K. & Mnih, V. Combining policy gradient and Q-learning. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:1611.01626 (2016).

60.   Williams, R. J. & Peng, J. An efficient gradient-based algorithm for on-line training of recurrent network trajec-
      tories. Neural computation 2, 490–501 (1990).




                                                          47
