                                                   Experience Replay for Continual Learning


                                                   David Rolnick                      Arun Ahuja                  Jonathan Schwarz
                                              University of Pennsylvania               DeepMind                       DeepMind
                                                Philadelphia, PA USA                  London, UK                     London, UK
                                             drolnick@seas.upenn.edu              arahuja@google.com            schwarzjn@google.com
arXiv:1811.11682v2 [cs.LG] 26 Nov 2019




                                                          Timothy P. Lillicrap                            Greg Wayne
                                                              DeepMind                                     DeepMind
                                                             London, UK                                   London, UK
                                                        countzero@google.com                         gregwayne@google.com



                                                                                       Abstract
                                                  Interacting with a complex world involves continual learning, in which tasks and
                                                  data distributions change over time. A continual learning system should demon-
                                                  strate both plasticity (acquisition of new knowledge) and stability (preservation of
                                                  old knowledge). Catastrophic forgetting is the failure of stability, in which new
                                                  experience overwrites previous experience. In the brain, replay of past experience
                                                  is widely believed to reduce forgetting, yet it has been largely overlooked as a
                                                  solution to forgetting in deep reinforcement learning. Here, we introduce CLEAR,
                                                  a replay-based method that greatly reduces catastrophic forgetting in multi-task
                                                  reinforcement learning. CLEAR leverages off-policy learning and behavioral
                                                  cloning from replay to enhance stability, as well as on-policy learning to preserve
                                                  plasticity. We show that CLEAR performs better than state-of-the-art deep learning
                                                  techniques for mitigating forgetting, despite being significantly less complicated
                                                  and not requiring any knowledge of the individual tasks being learned.


                                         1   Introduction
                                         An intelligent system that interacts with its environment faces the problem of continual learning,
                                         in which new experience is constantly being acquired, while old experience may still be relevant
                                         [25]. An effective continual learning system must optimize for two potentially conflicting goals.
                                         First, when a previously encountered scenario is encountered, performance should immediately be
                                         good, ideally as good as it was historically. Second, maintenance of old skills should not inhibit rapid
                                         acquisition of a new skill. These simultaneous constraints – maintaining the old while still adapting
                                         to the new – represent the challenge known as the stability-plasticity dilemma [6].
                                         The quintessential failure mode of continual learning is catastrophic forgetting, in which new
                                         knowledge supplants old knowledge, resulting in high plasticity but little stability. Within biological
                                         systems, hippocampal replay has been proposed as a systems-level mechanism to reduce catastrophic
                                         forgetting and improve generalization, as in the theory of complementary learning systems [18]. This
                                         process complements local consolidation of past experience at the level of individual neurons and
                                         synapses, which is also believed to be present in biological neural networks [2, 14].
                                         Within artificial continual learning systems, deep neural networks have become ubiquitous tools and
                                         increasingly are applied in situations where catastrophic forgetting becomes relevant. In reinforcement
                                         learning (RL) settings, this problem is often circumvented by using massive computational resources
                                         to ensure that all tasks are learned simultaneously, instead of sequentially. Namely, in simulation or
                                         in self-play RL, fresh data can be generated on demand and trained on within the same minibatch,
                                         resulting in a stable data distribution.

                                         33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.
However, as RL is increasingly applied to continual learning problems in industry or robotics,
situations arise where gathering new experience is expensive or difficult, and thus simultaneous
training is infeasible. Instead, an agent must be able to learn from one task at a time, and the sequence
in which tasks occur is not under the agent’s control. In fact, boundaries between tasks will often
be unknown – or tasks will deform continuously and not have definite boundaries at all [12]. Such
a paradigm for training eliminates the possibility of simultaneously acting upon and learning from
several tasks, and leads to the possibility of catastrophic forgetting.
There has recently been a surge of interest in methods for preventing catastrophic forgetting in RL,
inspired in part by neuroscience [11, 13, 27, 29]. Remarkably, however, such work has focused on
synaptic consolidation approaches, while possibilities of experience replay for reducing forgetting
have largely been ignored, and it has been unclear how replay could be applied in this context within
a deep RL framework.
We here demonstrate that replay can be a powerful tool in continual learning. We propose a simple
technique, Continual Learning with Experience And Replay (CLEAR), mixing on-policy learning
from novel experiences (for plasticity) and off-policy learning from replay experiences (for stability).
For additional stability, we introduce behavioral cloning between the current policy and its past self.
While it can be memory-intensive to store all past experience, we find that CLEAR is just as effective
even when memory is severely constrained. Our approach has the following advantages:

      • Stability and plasticity. CLEAR performs better than state-of-the-art (Elastic Weight
        Consolidation, Progress & Compress), almost eliminating catastrophic forgetting.
      • Simplicity. CLEAR is much simpler than prior methods for reducing forgetting and can
        also be combined easily with other approaches.
      • No task information. CLEAR does not rely upon the identity of tasks or the boundaries
        between them, by contrast with prior art. This means that CLEAR can be applied to a much
        broader range of situations, where tasks are unknown or are not discrete.

2   Related work
The problem of catastrophic forgetting in neural networks has long been recognized [6], and it is
known that rehearsing past data can be a satisfactory antidote for some purposes [4, 18]. Consequently,
in the supervised setting that is the most common paradigm in machine learning, forgetting has
been accorded less attention than in cognitive science or neuroscience, since a fixed dataset can be
reordered and replayed as necessary to ensure high performance on all samples.
In recent years, however, there has been renewed interest in overcoming catastrophic forgetting in
RL and in supervised learning from streaming data, where it is not possible simply to reorder the
data (see e.g. [8, 17, 24, 26]). Current strategies for mitigating catastrophic forgetting have primarily
focused on schemes for protecting the parameters inferred in one task while training on another.
For example, in Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) [13], weights important for past tasks are
constrained to change more slowly while learning new tasks. Progressive Networks [27] freezes
subnetworks trained on individual tasks, and Progress & Compress [29] uses EWC to consolidate the
network after each task has been learned. Kaplanis et al. [11] treat individual synaptic weights as
dynamical systems with latent dimensions / states that protect information. Outside of RL, Zenke et
al. [32] develop a method similar to EWC that maintains estimates of the importance of weights for
past tasks, Li and Hoiem [15] leverage a mixture of task-specific and shared parameters, and Milan et
al. [19] develop a rigorous Bayesian approach for estimating unknown task boundaries. Notably all
these methods assume that task identities or boundaries are known, with the exception of [19], for
which the approach is likely not scalable to highly complex tasks.
Rehearsing old data via experience replay buffers is a common technique in RL, but such methods
have largely been driven by the goal of data-efficient learning on single tasks [7, 16, 20]. Research in
this vein has included prioritized replay for maximizing the impact of rare experiences [28], learning
from human demonstration data seeded into a buffer [9], and methods for approximating replay
buffers with generative models [30]. A noteworthy use of experience replay buffers to protect against
catastrophic forgetting was demonstrated in Isele and Cosgun [10] on toy tasks, with a focus on how
buffers can be made smaller. Previous works [7, 22, 31] have explored mixing on- and off-policy
updates in RL, though these were focused on speed and stability in individual tasks and did not
examine continual learning.


                                                   2
While it may not be surprising that replay can reduce catastrophic forgetting to some extent, it is
remarkable that, as we show, it is powerful enough to outperform state-of-the-art methods. There
is a marked difference between reshuffling data in supervised learning and replaying past data in
RL. Notably, in RL, past data are typically leveraged best by off-policy algorithms since historical
actions may come from an out-of-date policy distribution. Reducing this deviation is our motivation
for the behavioral cloning component of CLEAR, inspired by work showing the power of policy
consolidation [12], self-imitation [23], and knowledge distillation [5].

3    The CLEAR Method
CLEAR uses actor-critic training on a mixture of new and replayed experiences. We employ
distributed training based on the Importance Weighted Actor-Learner Architecture presented in [3].
Namely, a single learning network is fed experiences (both novel and replay) by a number of acting
networks, for which the weights are asynchronously updated to match those of the learner. Training
proceeds as in [3] by the V-Trace off-policy learning algorithm, which uses truncated importance
weights to correct for off-policy distribution shifts. While V-Trace was designed to correct for the
lag between the parameters of the acting networks and those of the learning network, we find it
also successfully corrects for the distribution shift corresponding to replay experience. Our network
architecture and training hyperparameters are chosen to match those in [3] and are not further
optimized.
Formally, let θ denote the network parameters, πθ the (current) policy of the network over actions a,
µ the policy generating the observed experience, and hs the hidden state of the network at time s.
Then, the V-Trace target vs is given by:
                                             s+n−1         t−1
                                                                 !
                                              X            Y
                             vs := V (hs ) +       γ t−s       ci δt V,
                                                    t=s            i=s

where δt V := ρt (rt + γV (ht+1 ) − V (ht )) for truncated importance sampling weights ci :=
          θ (ai |hi )                       θ (at |ht )
min(c̄, πµ(a  i |hi )
                      ), and ρt = min(ρ̄, πµ(a  t |ht )
                                                        ) (with c̄ and ρ̄ constants). The policy gradient loss is:
                      Lpolicy-gradient := −ρs log πθ (as |hs ) (rs + γvs+1 − Vθ (hs )) .
The value function update is given by the L2 loss, and we regularize policies using an entropy loss:
                                          2
                                                         X
                Lvalue := (Vθ (hs ) − vs ) , Lentropy :=    πθ (a|hs ) log πθ (a|hs ).
                                                                  a

The loss functions Lpolicy-gradient , Lvalue , and Lentropy are applied both for new and replay experiences. In
addition, we add Lpolicy-cloning and Lvalue-cloning for replay experiences only. In general, our experiments
use a 50-50 mixture of novel and replay experiences, though performance does not appear to be very
sensitive to this ratio. Further implementation details are given in Appendix A.
In the case of replay experiences, two additional loss terms are added to induce behavioral cloning
between the network and its past self, with the goal of preventing network output on replayed tasks
from drifting while learning new tasks. We penalize (1) the KL divergence between the historical
policy distribution and the present policy distribution, (2) the L2 norm of the difference between the
historical and present value functions. Formally, this corresponds to adding the loss functions:
                          X              µ(a|hs )
       Lpolicy-cloning :=   µ(a|hs ) log             , Lvalue-cloning := ||Vθ (hs ) − Vreplay (hs )||22 .
                          a
                                         π θ (a|hs )

Note that computing KL[µ||πθ ] instead of KL[πθ ||µ] ensures that πθ (a|hs ) is nonzero wherever the
historical policy is as well.

4    Results
4.1 Catastrophic forgetting vs. interference
Our first experiment (Figure 1) was designed to distinguish between two distinct concepts that are
sometimes conflated, interference and catastrophic forgetting, and to emphasize the outsized role of
the latter as compared to the former. Interference occurs when two or more tasks are incompatible
(destructive interference) or mutually helpful (constructive interference) within the same model.
Catastrophic forgetting occurs when a task’s performance goes down not because of incompatibility


                                                        3
Figure 1: Separate, simultaneous, and sequential training: the x-axis denotes environment steps
summed across all tasks and the y-axis episode score. In “Sequential”, thick line segments are used
to denote the task currently being trained, while thin segments are plotted by evaluating performance
without learning. In simultaneous training, performance on explore_object_locations_small
is higher than in separate training, an example of modest constructive interference. In sequential
training, tasks that are not currently being learned exhibit very dramatic catastrophic forgetting. See
Appendix B for plots of the same data, showing cumulative performance.




Figure 2: Demonstration of CLEAR on three DMLab tasks, which are trained cyclically in sequence.
CLEAR reduces catastrophic forgetting so significantly that sequential tasks train almost as well as
simultaneous tasks (compare to Figure 1). When the behavioral cloning loss terms are ablated, there
is still reduced forgetting from off-policy replay alone. As above, thicker line segments are used to
denote the task that is currently being trained. See Appendix B for plots of the same data, showing
cumulative performance.
with another task but because the second task overwrites it within the model. As we aim to illustrate,
the two are independent phenomena, and while interference may happen, forgetting is ubiquitous.1
We considered a set of three distinct tasks within the DMLab set of environments [1], and compared
three training paradigms on which a network may be trained to perform these three tasks: (1)
Training networks on the individual tasks separately, (2) training a single network examples from
all tasks simultaneously (which permits interference among tasks), and (3) training a single network
sequentially on examples from one task, then the next task, and so on cyclically. Across all training
protocols, the total amount of experience for each task was held constant. Thus, for separate networks
training on separate tasks, the x-axis in our plots shows the total number of environment frames
summed across all tasks. For example, at three million frames with one million each on tasks one,
two, and three. This allows a direct comparison to simultaneous training, in which the same network
was trained on all three tasks.
We observe that in DMLab, there is very little difference between separate and simultaneous training.
This indicates minimal interference between tasks. If anything, there is slight constructive interference,
with simultaneous training performing marginally better than separate training. We assume this is
a result of (i) commonalities in image processing required across different tasks, and (ii) certain
   1
     As an example of (destructive) interference, learning how to drive on the right side of the road may be
difficult while also learning how to drive on the left side of the road, because of the nature of the tasks involved.
Forgetting, by contrast, results from sequentially training on one and then another task - e.g. learning how to
drive and then not doing it for a long time.


                                                         4
basic exploratory behaviors, e.g., moving around, that are advantageous across tasks. (By contrast,
destructive interference might result from incompatible behaviors or from insufficient model capacity.)
By contrast, there is a large difference between either of the above modes of training and sequential
training, where performance on a task decays immediately when training switches to another task
– that is, catastrophic forgetting. Note that the performance of the sequential training appears at
some points to be greater than that of separate training. This is purely because in sequential training,
training proceeds exclusively on a single task, then exclusively on another task. For example, the first
task quickly increases in performance since the network is effectively seeing three times as much
data on that task as the networks training on separate or simultaneous tasks.

                                           explore...     rooms_collect...       rooms_keys...
      Separate                                29.24               8.79                19.91
      Simultaneous                            32.35               8.81                20.56
      Sequential (no CLEAR)                   17.99               5.01                10.87
      CLEAR (50-50 new-replay)                31.40               8.00                18.13
      CLEAR w/o behavioral cloning            28.66               7.79                16.63
      CLEAR, 75-25 new-replay                 30.28               7.83                17.86
      CLEAR, 100% replay                      31.09               7.48                13.39
      CLEAR, buffer 5M                        30.33               8.00                18.07
      CLEAR, buffer 50M                       30.82               7.99                18.21
Figure 3: Quantitative comparison of the final cumulative performance between standard training
(“Sequential (no CLEAR)”) and various versions of CLEAR on a cyclically repeating sequence of
DMLab tasks. We also include the results of training on each individual task with a separate network
(“Separate”) and on all tasks simultaneously (“Simultaneous”) instead of sequentially (see Figure 1).
As described in Section 4.1, these are no-forgetting scenarios and thus present upper bounds on the
performance expected in a continual learning setting, where tasks are presented sequentially. Remark-
ably, CLEAR achieves performance comparable to “Separate” and “Simultaneous”, demonstrating
that forgetting is virtually eliminated. See Appendix B for further details and plots.
4.2 Stability
We here demonstrate the efficacy of CLEAR for diminishing catastrophic forgetting (Figure 2). We
apply CLEAR to the cyclically repeating sequence of DMLab tasks used in the preceding experiment.
Our method effectively eliminates forgetting on all three tasks, while preserving overall training
performance (see “Sequential” training in Figure 1 for reference). When the task switches, there is
little, if any, dropoff in performance when using CLEAR, and the network picks up immediately
where it left off once a task returns later in training. Without behavioral cloning, the mixture of new
experience and replay still reduces catastrophic forgetting, though the effect is reduced.
In Figure 3, we perform a quantitative comparison of the performance for CLEAR against the
performance of standard training on sequential tasks, as well as training on tasks separately and
simultaneously. In order to perform a comparison that effectively captures the overall performance
during continual learning
                      P (including the effect of catastrophic forgetting), the reward shown for time
t is the average (1/t) s<t rs , thus effectively measuring the area under the curve for plots such as
Figure 2. (We replot the results of our main experiments according to the cumulative performance in
Appendix B.) We find that CLEAR attains similar cumulative performance to networks trained on
tasks separately and simultaneously – effectively eliminating catastrophic forgetting.
4.3 Plasticity
It is a reasonable worry that relying on a replay buffer could cause new tasks to be learned more slowly
as the new task data will make up a smaller and smaller portion of the replay buffer as the buffer gets
larger. In this experiment (Figure 4), we find that this is not a problem for CLEAR, relying as it does
on a mixture of off- and on-policy learning. Specifically, we find the performance attained on a task
is largely independent of the amount of data stored in the buffer and on the identities of the preceding
tasks. We consider a cyclically repeating sequence of three DMLab tasks. At different points in
the sequence, we insert a fourth DMLab task (natlab_varying_map_randomized) as a “probe”.
We find that the performance attained on the probe task is independent of the point at which it is
introduced within the training sequence. This is true both for normal training and for CLEAR. Notably,
CLEAR succeeds in greatly reducing catastrophic forgetting for all tasks, and the effect on the probe
task does not diminish as the probe task is introduced later on in the training sequence. We also test


                                                   5
the performance of CLEAR using 100% (off-policy) replay experience. We observe that, unlike with
standard CLEAR, the performance obtained on the probe task natlab_varying_map_randomized
deteriorates markedly as it appears later in the sequence of tasks. For later positions in the sequence,
the probe task comprises a smaller percentage of replay experience, thereby impeding purely off-
policy learning. This result underlines why CLEAR uses new experience, as well as replay, to allow
rapid learning of new tasks.




Figure 4: The DMLab task natlab_varying_map_randomize (brown line) is presented as a “probe
task” at different positions within a cyclically repeating sequence of three other DMLab tasks. As
in previous experiments, CLEAR greatly reduces catastrophic forgetting. The key point here is that
the performance attained on the probe task does not depend on the identities of the preceding tasks
and does not degrade as more experiences and tasks are introduced into the buffer (i.e., as the probe
task appears later in the task sequence). In the case that all learning is driven by the replay buffer,
however, performance on the probe task does degrade as the buffer fills. This justifies our use of a
mixture of novel and replay experience in training CLEAR, to allow for fast learning of new tasks, in
addition to preventing catastrophic forgetting.
4.4 Balance of on- and off-policy learning
In this experiment (Figure 5), we consider the ratio of new examples to replay examples during
training. Using 100% new examples is simply standard training, which as we have seen is subject
to dramatic catastrophic forgetting. At 75-25 new-replay, there is already significant resistance to
forgetting. At the opposite extreme, 100% replay examples is extremely resistant to catastrophic
forgetting, but at the expense of a (slight) decrease in performance attained. We believe that 50-
50 new-replay represents a good tradeoff, combining significantly reduced catastrophic forgetting


                                                   6
with no appreciable decrease in performance attained. Unless otherwise stated, our experiments on
CLEAR will use a 50-50 split of new and replay data in training.




Figure 5: Comparison between different proportions of new and replay examples while cycling
training among three tasks. We observe that with a 75-25 new-replay split, CLEAR eliminates most,
but not all, catastrophic forgetting. At the opposite extreme, 100% replay prevents forgetting at the
expense of reduced overall performance (with an especially noticeable reduction in early performance
on the task rooms_keys_doors_puzzle). A 50-50 split represents a good tradeoff between these
extremes. See Appendix B for plots of the same data, showing cumulative performance.

It is notable that it is possible to train purely on replay examples, since the network has essentially
no on-policy learning. In fact, the figure shows that with 100% replay, performance on each task
increases throughout, even when on-policy learning is being applied to a different task. Just as Figure
2 shows the importance of behavioral cloning for maintaining past performance on a task, so this
experiment shows that off-policy learning can actually increase performance from replay alone. Both
ingredients are necessary for the success of CLEAR.
4.5 Limited-size buffers
In some cases, it may be impractical to store all past experiences in the replay buffer. We therefore
test the efficacy of buffers that have capacity for only a relatively small number of experiences (Figure
6). Once the buffer is full, we use reservoir sampling to decide when to replace elements of the
buffer with new experiences [10] (see details in Appendix A). Thus, at each point in time, the buffer
contains a (fixed size) sample uniformly at random of all past experiences.




Figure 6: Comparison of the performance of training with different buffer sizes, using reservoir
sampling to ensure that each buffer stores a uniform sample from all past experience. We observe
only minimal difference in performance, with the smallest buffer (storing 1 in 200 experiences)
demonstrating some catastrophic forgetting. See Appendix B for plots of the same data, showing
cumulative performance.
We consider a sequence of tasks with 900 million environmental frames, comparing a large buffer
of capacity 450 million to two small buffers of capacity 5 and 50 million. We find that all buffers
perform well and conclude that it is possible to learn and reduce catastrophic forgetting even with
a replay buffer that is significantly smaller than the total number of experiences. Decreasing the
buffer size to 5 million results in a slight decrease in robustness to catastrophic forgetting. This
may be due to over-fitting to the limited examples present in the buffer, on which the learner trains
disproportionately often.
4.6 Comparison to P&C and EWC
Finally, we compare our method to Progress & Compress (P&C) [29] and Elastic Weight Consoli-
dation (EWC) [13], state-of-the-art methods for reducing catastrophic forgetting that, unlike replay,


                                                   7
assume that the boundaries between different tasks are known (Figure 7). We use exactly the same
sequence of Atari tasks as the authors of P&C [29], with the same time spent on each task. Likewise,
the network and hyperparameters we use are designed to match exactly those used in [29]. This is
simplified by the authors of P&C also using a training paradigm based on that in [3]. In this case, we
use CLEAR with a 75-25 balance of new-replay experience.




              space_invaders       krull     beam_rider       hero      star_gunner     ms_pacman
  Baseline         346.47         5512.36       952.72      2737.32       1065.20        753.83
  CLEAR            426.72         8845.12       585.05      8106.22        991.74        1222.82
  EWC              549.22         5352.92       432.78      4499.35        704.20        639.75
  P&C              455.34         7025.40       743.38      3433.10       1261.86        924.52
Figure 7: (a) Comparison of CLEAR to Progress & Compress (P&C) and Elastic Weight Consol-
idation (EWC). We find that CLEAR demonstrates comparable or greater performance than these
methods, despite being significantly simpler and not requiring any knowledge of boundaries between
tasks. See Appendix B for plots of the same data, showing cumulative performance. (b) Quantitative
comparison of the final cumulative performance between these methods. Overall, CLEAR performs
comparably to or better than P&C, and significantly better than EWC and baseline.


We find that we obtain slightly better performance than P&C and significantly better performance than
EWC, despite CLEAR being much simpler and agnostic to the boundaries between tasks. It is worth


                                                  8
noting that though the on-policy model (baseline) experiences significant catastrophic forgetting, it
also rapidly re-acquires its previous performance after re-exposure to the task; this allows baseline to
be cumulatively better than EWC on some tasks (as is noted in the original paper [13]). An alternative
plot of this experiment, showing cumulative performance on each task, is presented in Appendix B.

5   Discussion
The ingredients in the CLEAR method are intuitively complementary. The behavioral cloning objec-
tive keeps the policy distribution close to historical data, which in turn ensures that the importance-
weighted gradient estimates have lower variance than they would with purely off-policy estimation.
The behavioral cloning loss acts as regularization while not preventing ultimate convergence; as
training proceeds, the behavioral cloning loss increasingly acts to regularize the network towards
improved policies, which constitute a greater proportion of the replayed experience. Further study is
warranted to study these intuitive claims more formally.
Algorithms for continual learning may live on a Pareto frontier: different methods may have different
regimes of applicability. In cases where storing a memory buffer is truly prohibitive, methods
that protect inferred parameters, such as Progress & Compress, may be more suitable. When task
identities are available or boundaries between tasks are clear, leveraging this information may reduce
memory or computational demands or be useful to alert the agent to learn rapidly. Further, there exist
training scenarios that are adversarial either to our method or to any method that prevents forgetting.
For example, if the action space of a task changed during training, fitting to the old policy’s action
distribution, through behavioral cloning, off-policy learning, weight protection, or any of a number of
other strategies for preventing forgetting, could have a deleterious effect on performance. For such
cases, we may need to develop algorithms that selectively forget skills as well as protecting them.
We anticipate many algorithmic innovations that build on the ideas set forward here. For example,
weight-consolidation techniques such as Progress & Compress are quite orthogonal to our approach
and could be married with it for further performance gains. Moreover, while the V-Trace algorithm
we use is effective at off-policy correction for small shifts between the present and past policy
distributions, it is possible that off-policy approaches leveraging Q-functions, such as Retrace [21],
may prove more powerful still. We believe the experimental protocols we introduce – such as
comparing separate, simultaneous, and sequential training, and “probing” with a novel task at
different points in a training sequence – may prove useful in guiding future work in this area.
We have described a simple but powerful approach for preventing catastrophic forgetting in continual
learning settings. CLEAR uses on-policy learning on fresh experiences to adapt rapidly to new
tasks, while using off-policy learning with behavioral cloning on replay experience to maintain and
modestly enhance performance on past tasks. Behavioral cloning on replay data further enhances
the agent’s stability. Our method is simple, scalable, and practical; it takes advantage of the general
abundance of memory and storage in modern computers and computing facilities. We believe that the
broad applicability and simplicity of the approach make CLEAR a candidate “first line of defense”
against catastrophic forgetting in many RL contexts.

References
 [1] Charles Beattie, Joel Z Leibo, Denis Teplyashin, Tom Ward, Marcus Wainwright, Heinrich
     Küttler, Andrew Lefrancq, Simon Green, Víctor Valdés, Amir Sadik, et al. DeepMind Lab.
     Preprint arXiv:1612.03801, 2016.
 [2] Marcus K Benna and Stefano Fusi. Computational principles of synaptic memory consolidation.
     Nature neuroscience, 19(12):1697, 2016.
 [3] Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Volodymir Mnih, Tom Ward,
     Yotam Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. IMPALA: Scalable distributed
     Deep-RL with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In ICML, 2018.
 [4] Robert M French. Catastrophic forgetting in connectionist networks. Trends in cognitive
     sciences, 3(4):128–135, 1999.
 [5] Tommaso Furlanello, Zachary C Lipton, Michael Tschannen, Laurent Itti, and Anima Anandku-
     mar. Born again neural networks. ICML, 2018.
 [6] Stephen Grossberg. How does a brain build a cognitive code? In Studies of mind and brain,
     pages 1–52. Springer, 1982.


                                                   9
 [7] Shixiang Gu, Tim Lillicrap, Richard E Turner, Zoubin Ghahramani, Bernhard Schölkopf,
     and Sergey Levine. Interpolated policy gradient: Merging on-policy and off-policy gradient
     estimation for deep reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS, 2017.
 [8] Tyler L Hayes, Nathan D Cahill, and Christopher Kanan. Memory efficient experience replay
     for streaming learning. Preprint arXiv:1809.05922, 2018.
 [9] Todd Hester, Matej Vecerik, Olivier Pietquin, Marc Lanctot, Tom Schaul, Bilal Piot, Dan
     Horgan, John Quan, Andrew Sendonaris, Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, et al. Deep Q-learning from
     demonstrations. In AAAI, 2018.
[10] David Isele and Akansel Cosgun. Selective experience replay for lifelong learning. In AAAI,
     2018.
[11] Christos Kaplanis, Murray Shanahan, and Claudia Clopath. Continual reinforcement learning
     with complex synapses. In ICML, 2018.
[12] Christos Kaplanis, Murray Shanahan, and Claudia Clopath. Policy consolidation for continual
     reinforcement learning. In ICML, 2019.
[13] James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins,
     Andrei A Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska,
     et al. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. In Proceedings of the National
     Academy of Sciences, 2017.
[14] Pascal Leimer, Michael Herzog, and Walter Senn. Synaptic weight decay with selective
     consolidation enables fast learning without catastrophic forgetting. BioRxiv, page 613265, 2019.
[15] Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem. Learning without forgetting. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
     Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2017.
[16] Long-Ji Lin. Self-improving reactive agents based on reinforcement learning, planning and
     teaching. Machine learning, 8(3-4):293–321, 1992.
[17] David Lopez-Paz et al. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning. In NeurIPS, pages
     6467–6476, 2017.
[18] James L McClelland. Complementary learning systems in the brain: A connectionist approach
     to explicit and implicit cognition and memory. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences,
     843(1):153–169, 1998.
[19] Kieran Milan, Joel Veness, James Kirkpatrick, Michael Bowling, Anna Koop, and Demis
     Hassabis. The forget-me-not process. In NeurIPS, 2016.
[20] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G
     Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al.
     Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529, 2015.
[21] Rémi Munos, Tom Stepleton, Anna Harutyunyan, and Marc Bellemare. Safe and efficient
     off-policy reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS, 2016.
[22] Brendan O’Donoghue, Remi Munos, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Volodymyr Mnih. Combining
     policy gradient and Q-learning. In ICLR, 2017.
[23] Junhyuk Oh, Yijie Guo, Satinder Singh, and Honglak Lee. Self-imitation learning. ICML, 2018.
[24] German I Parisi, Ronald Kemker, Jose L Part, Christopher Kanan, and Stefan Wermter. Continual
     lifelong learning with neural networks: A review. Neural Networks, 2019.
[25] Mark B Ring. Child: A first step towards continual learning. Machine Learning, 28(1):77–104,
     1997.
[26] Amanda Rios and Laurent Itti.         Closed-loop GAN for continual learning.         Preprint
     arXiv:1811.0114, 2018.
[27] Andrei A Rusu, Neil C Rabinowitz, Guillaume Desjardins, Hubert Soyer, James Kirkpatrick,
     Koray Kavukcuoglu, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progressive neural networks. Preprint
     arXiv:1606.04671, 2016.
[28] Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay.
     In ICLR, 2016.


                                                 10
[29] Jonathan Schwarz, Jelena Luketina, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska,
     Yee Whye Teh, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progress & compress: A scalable framework
     for continual learning. In ICML, 2018.
[30] Hanul Shin, Jung Kwon Lee, Jaehong Kim, and Jiwon Kim. Continual learning with deep
     generative replay. In NeurIPS, 2017.
[31] Ziyu Wang, Victor Bapst, Nicolas Heess, Volodymyr Mnih, Remi Munos, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
     and Nando de Freitas. Sample efficient actor-critic with experience replay. In ICLR, 2017.
[32] Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. Continual learning through synaptic
     intelligence. In ICML, 2017.




                                              11
A     Implementation details
A.1   Distributed setup

Our training setup was based on that of [3], with multiple actors and a single learner. The actors
(which run on CPU) generate training examples, which are then sent to the learner. Weight updates
made by the learner are propagated asynchronously to the actors. The workflows for each actor and
for the learner are described below in more detail.
Actor. An unroll (a specified number of timesteps of a training episode) is generated and inserted
into the actor’s buffer. Reservoir sampling is used (see details below) if the buffer has reached its
maximum capacity. The actor then samples another unroll from the buffer. The new unroll and replay
unroll are both fed into a queue of examples that are read by the learner. The actor waits until its last
example in the queue is read before creating another.
Learner. Each element of a batch is a pair (new unroll, replay unroll) from the queue provided by
actors. Thus, the number of new unrolls and the number of replay unrolls both equal the entire batch
size. Depending on the buffer utilization hyperparameter (see Figure 5), the learner uses a balance of
new and replay examples, taking either the new unroll or the replay unroll from each pair. Thus, no
actor contributes more than a single example to the batch (reducing the variance of batches).

A.2   Network

For our DMLab experiments, we used the same network as in the DMLab experiments of [3].
We selected the shallower of the models considered there (a network based on [20]), omitting the
additional LSTM module used for processing textual input since none of the tasks we considered
included such input. For Atari, we used the same network in Progress & Compress [29] (which is
also based on [3]), also copying all hyperparameters.

A.3   Buffers

Our replay buffer stores all information necessary for the V-Trace algorithm, namely the input
presented by the environment, the output logits of the network, the value function output by the
network, the action taken, and the reward obtained. Leveraging the distributed setup, the buffer is
split among all actors equally, so that, for example, if the total buffer size were one million across
a hundred actors, then each actor would have buffer capacity of ten thousand. All buffer sizes are
measured in environment frames (not in numbers of unrolls), in keeping with the x-axis of our
training plots. For baseline experiments, no buffer was used, while all other parameters and the
network remained constant.
Unless otherwise specified, the replay buffer was capped at half the number of environment frames
on which the network is trained. This is by design – to show that even past the buffer capacity, replay
continues to prevent catastrophic forgetting. When the buffer fills up, then new unrolls are added by
reservoir sampling, so that the buffer at any given point contains a uniformly random sample of all
unrolls up until the present time. Reservoir sampling is implemented as in [10] by having each unroll
associated with a random number between 0 and 1. A threshold is initialized to 0 and rises with time
so that the number of unrolls above the threshold is fixed at the capacity of the buffer. Each unroll is
either stored or abandoned in its entirety; no unroll is partially stored, as this would preclude training.

A.4   Training

Training was conducted using V-Trace, with hyperparameters on DMLab/Atari tasks set as in [3].
Behavioral cloning loss functions Lpolicy-cloning and Lvalue-cloning were added in some experiments with
weights of 0.01 and 0.005, respectively. The established loss functions Lpolicy-gradient , Lvalue , and
Lentropy were applied with weights of 1, 0.5, and ≈0.005, in keeping with [3]. No significant effort
was made to optimize fully the hyperparameters for CLEAR.

A.5   Evaluation

We evaluate each network during training on all tasks, not simply that task on which it is currently
being trained. Evaluation is performed by pools of testing actors, with a separate pool for each task


                                                   12
in question. Each pool of testing actors asynchronously updates its weights to match those of the
learner, similarly to the standard (training) actors used in our distributed learning setup. The key
differences are that each testing actor (i) has no replay buffer, (ii) does not feed examples to the
learner for training, (iii) runs on its designated task regardless of whether this task is the one currently
in use by training actors.

A.6   Experiments

In many of our experiments, we consider tasks that change after a specified number of learning
episodes. The total number of episodes is monitored by the learner, and all actors switch between
tasks simultaneously at the designated point, henceforward feeding examples to the learner based on
experiences on the new task (as well as replay examples). Each experiment was run independently
three times; figures plot the mean performance across runs, with error bars showing the standard
deviation.

B     Figures replotted according to cumulative sum
In this section, we replot the results of our main experiments, so that the y-axis shows the mean
               P obtained on each task during training; that is, the reward shown for time t is the
cumulative reward
average (1/t) s<t rs . This makes it easier to compare performance between models, though it
smoothes out the individual periods of catastrophic forgetting so they are no longer visible. Figures 3
and 7 in the main body of the paper tabulate the final cumulative rewards at the end of training.




Figure 8: Alternative plot of the experiments shown in Figure 1, showing the difference in cumulative
performance between training on tasks separately, simultaneously, and sequentially (without using
CLEAR). The marked decrease in performance for sequential training is due to catastrophic forgetting.
As in our earlier plots, thicker line segments are used to denote times at which the network is gaining
new experience on a given task.




Figure 9: Alternative plot of the experiments shown in Figure 2, showing how applying CLEAR
when training on sequentially presented tasks gives almost the same results as training on all tasks
simultaneously (compare to sequential and simultaneous training in Figure 8 above). Applying
CLEAR without behavioral cloning also yields decent results.




                                                    13
Figure 10: Alternative plot of the experiments shown in Figure 5, comparing performance between
using CLEAR with 75-25 new-replay experience, 50-50 new-replay experience, and 100% replay
experience. An equal balance of new and replay experience seems to represent a good tradeoff
between stability and plasticity, while 100% replay reduces forgetting but lowers performance overall.




Figure 11: Alternative plot of the experiments shown in Figure 6, showing that reduced-size buffers
still allow CLEAR to achieve essentially the same performance.




Figure 12: Alternative plot of the experiments shown in Figure 7, showing that CLEAR attains
comparable or better performance than the more complicated methods Progress & Compress (P&C)
and Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC), which also require information about task boundaries,
unlike CLEAR.




                                                 14
